Deuteronomy
Chapter 1
1 These are the words that Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth, and Dizahab.
2 It is eleven days’ journey from Horeb by the way of Mount Seir to Kadesh-Barnea.
3 And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke to the sons of Israel according to all that the Lord had commanded him concerning them,
4 after he had struck Sihon the king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt in Ashtaroth at Edrei.


5 Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses undertook to explain this law, saying,
6 "The Lord our God spoke to us at Horeb, saying, ‘You have dwelt long enough at this mountain.
7 Turn and set out, and go to the hill country of the Amorites and to all their neighbors in the Arabah, in the hill country and in the lowland, in the Negev and by the seacoast, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.
8 See, I have set the land before you. Go in and possess the land that the Lord swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them.’


9 "And I spoke to you at that time, saying, ‘I am not able to bear you alone.
10 The Lord your God has multiplied you, and behold, you are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
11 May the Lord, the God of your fathers, increase you a thousand times more than you are and bless you, as He has promised you!
12 How can I alone bear your burden and your load and your strife?
13 Take wise men of understanding, well-known among your tribes, and I will set them as heads over you.’ 


14 "And you answered me and said, ‘The thing that you have spoken is good for us to do.’
15 So I took the heads of your tribes, wise and well-known men, and set them as heads over you, leaders of thousands, leaders of hundreds, leaders of fifties, and leaders of tens, and officers for your tribes.
16 And I charged your judges at that time, saying, ‘Hear the cases between your brothers, and judge righteously between a man and his brother or the foreigner who is with him.
17 You shall not show partiality in judgment; you shall hear the small and the great alike. You shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is God’s. And the case that is too hard for you, you shall bring to me, and I will hear it.’
18 And I commanded you at that time all the things that you should do.


19 "And we set out from Horeb and went through all that great and terrifying wilderness that you saw, on the way to the hill country of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commanded us, and we came to Kadesh-Barnea.
20 And I said to you, ‘You have come to the hill country of the Amorites, which the Lord our God is giving us.
21 See, the Lord your God has set the land before you. Go up, take possession, as the Lord, the God of your fathers, has spoken to you. Do not fear or be dismayed.’


22 "Then all of you approached me and said, ‘Let us send men before us, that they may explore the land for us and bring us word again of the way by which we should go up and the cities into which we shall come.’
23 And the thing was good in my eyes, and I took twelve men from you, one man from each tribe.
24 And they turned and went up into the hill country, and came to the Valley of Eshcol and spied it out.
25 And they took in their hands some of the fruit of the land and brought it down to us, and brought us word again and said, ‘It is a good land that the Lord our God is giving us.’


26 "Yet you would not go up, but rebelled against the command of the Lord your God.
27 And you murmured in your tents and said, ‘Because the Lord hated us, He has brought us out of the land of Egypt to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us.
28 Where are we going up? Our brothers have made our hearts melt, saying, “The people are greater and taller than we are; the cities are great and fortified up to heaven. And besides, we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.”’
29 Then I said to you, ‘Do not be terrified, nor be afraid of them.
30 The Lord your God, who goes before you, He will fight for you, according to all that He did for you in Egypt before your eyes,
31 and in the wilderness, where you have seen how the Lord your God carried you, as a man carries his son, in all the way that you went until you came to this place.’
32 Yet in this matter you did not believe the Lord your God,
33 who went before you in the way to seek you out a place to pitch your tents, in fire by night to show you by what way you should go, and in the cloud by day.


34 "And the Lord heard the voice of your words and was angry, and He swore, saying,
35 ‘Not one of these men of this evil generation shall see the good land that I swore to give to your fathers,
36 except Caleb the son of Jephunneh. He shall see it, and to him and to his sons I will give the land on which he has trodden, because he has wholly followed the Lord!’
37 Also the Lord was angry with me because of you, saying, ‘You also shall not go in there.
38 Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before you, he shall go in there. Encourage him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
39 And your little ones, whom you said would become a prey, and your sons, who this day have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in there, and to them I will give it, and they shall possess it.
40 But as for you, turn and set out toward the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.’


41 "Then you answered and said to me, ‘We have sinned against the Lord. We will go up and fight, according to all that the Lord our God commanded us.’ And every man of you girded on his weapons of war and thought it easy to go up into the hill country.
42 And the Lord said to me, ‘Say to them, “Do not go up nor fight, for I am not in your midst, lest you be struck down before your enemies.”’
43 So I spoke to you, and you would not listen, but you rebelled against the command of the Lord and presumptuously went up into the hill country.
44 And the Amorites who dwelt in that hill country came out against you and chased you as bees do and beat you down in Seir as far as Hormah.
45 And you returned and wept before the Lord, but the Lord did not listen to your voice or give ear to you.
46 So you dwelt in Kadesh many days, according to the days that you dwelt there."
Chapter 2
1 Then we turned and journeyed into the wilderness by the way of the Red Sea, as the Lord had spoken to me, and we circled Mount Seir for many days.
2 And the Lord said to me,
3 “You have circled this mountain long enough; turn northward.
4 And command the men, saying, ‘You are about to pass through the territory of your brothers, the sons of Esau, who live in Seir; and they will be afraid of you. So be very careful.
5 Do not provoke them, for I will not give you any of their land, not even the tread of the sole of a foot, because I have given Mount Seir to Esau as a possession.
6 You shall purchase food from them with silver so that you may eat, and you shall also buy water from them with silver so that you may drink.
7 For the Lord your God has blessed you in all the work of your hands; He knows your journeying through this great wilderness. These forty years the Lord your God has been with you; you have lacked nothing.’”


8 So we passed by our brothers, the sons of Esau who live in Seir, away from the way of the Arabah, away from Elath and Ezion-geber. Then we turned and passed through the way of the wilderness of Moab.
9 And the Lord said to me, “Do not harass Moab or provoke them to war, for I will not give you any of their land as a possession, because I have given Ar to the sons of Lot as a possession.”
10 (The Emim formerly lived there, a great and numerous nation, as tall as the Anakim.
11 They also are regarded as Rephaim, like the Anakim, but the Moabites call them Emim.
12 The Horites also lived in Seir formerly, but the sons of Esau dispossessed them and destroyed them from before them and settled in their place, just as Israel did to the land of their possession, which the Lord gave to them.)
13 “Now rise up and cross over the brook Zered.” So we crossed over the brook Zered.
14 And the time from our leaving Kadesh-barnea until we crossed the brook Zered was thirty-eight years, until all the generation of the men of war had perished from the camp, as the Lord had sworn to them.
15 For indeed the hand of the Lord was against them, to destroy them from the camp until they had perished.


16 So it came to pass, when all the men of war had finally perished from among the men,
17 that the Lord spoke to me, saying,
18 “Today you are to cross over at Ar, the border of Moab.
19 And when you approach the sons of Ammon, do not harass them or provoke them, for I will not give you any of the land of the sons of Ammon as a possession, because I have given it to the sons of Lot as a possession.”
20 (It also is regarded as a land of Rephaim; Rephaim formerly lived there, but the Ammonites call them Zamzummim,
21 a great and numerous nation, as tall as the Anakim. But the Lord destroyed the Rephaim as the Ammonites progressed, and they dispossessed them and settled in their place,
22 just as He did for the sons of Esau who live in Seir, when He destroyed the Horites from before them; they dispossessed them and have settled in their place even to this day.
23 And the Avvim, who lived in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came from Caphtor, destroyed them and settled in their place.)
24 “Rise up, set out, and cross over the valley of the Arnon. Behold, I have given into your hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin to possess it and engage him in battle.
25 This day I will begin to put the dread and fear of you upon the nations under the whole heaven, who shall hear the report of you and shall tremble and be in anguish because of you.”


26 So I sent messengers from the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
27 “Let me pass through your land; I will go only by the road, I will not turn aside to the right or to the left.
28 You shall sell me food for silver so that I may eat, and give me water for silver so that I may drink. Only let me pass through on foot,
29 as the sons of Esau who live in Seir and the Moabites who live in Ar did for me, until I cross the Jordan into the land that the Lord our God is giving us.”
30 But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass through, for the Lord your God hardened his spirit and made his heart obstinate, that He might deliver him into your hand, as it is this day.
31 And the Lord said to me, “Behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land over to you. Begin to possess it, that you may inherit his land.”
32 Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his men, to battle at Jahaz.
33 And the Lord our God delivered him over to us, and we struck him down, along with his sons and all his men.
34 And we captured all his cities at that time and utterly destroyed every city—men, women, and children; we left no survivor.
35 Only the livestock we took as spoil for ourselves, with the plunder of the cities that we captured.
36 From Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the city that is in the valley, as far as Gilead, there was not a city too high for us; the Lord our God gave all into our hands.
37 Only to the land of the sons of Ammon you did not draw near, all along the river Jabbok and the cities of the hill country, just as the Lord our God had commanded.
Chapter 3
1 Then we turned and went up the road to Bashan, and Og, king of Bashan, came out against us, he and all his army, to battle at Edrei.
2 The Lord said to me, "Do not fear him, for I have given him and all his army and his land into your hand. You shall do to him as you did to Sihon, king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon."
3 So the Lord our God gave into our hand Og, king of Bashan, and all his army. We struck him down until no survivor was left to him.
4 We captured all his cities at that time; there was not a town that we did not take from them—sixty cities, the whole region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
5 All these were fortified cities with high walls, gates, and bars, besides a great many unwalled villages.
6 We devoted them to destruction, as we did to Sihon, king of Heshbon, devoting to destruction every city—men, women, and children.
7 But all the livestock and the spoil of the cities we took as plunder for ourselves.


8 So at that time we took the land from the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from the Valley of the Arnon to Mount Hermon
9 (the Sidonians call Hermon Sirion, while the Amorites call it Senir),
10 all the cities of the plain and all Gilead and all Bashan, as far as Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
11 (For only Og, king of Bashan, was left of the remnant of the Rephaim. His bed was a bed of iron. Is it not in Rabbah of the Ammonites? Nine cubits was its length, and four cubits its width, according to the cubit of a man.)


12 So we took possession of this land at that time. From Aroer, which is by the Valley of the Arnon, and half the hill country of Gilead with its cities I gave to the Reubenites and the Gadites.
13 The rest of Gilead and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh (all the region of Argob, all that Bashan, is called the land of Rephaim).
14 Jair, son of Manasseh, took all the region of Argob as far as the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and he called them, that is Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-jair, as it is to this day.
15 To Machir I gave Gilead,
16 and to the Reubenites and the Gadites I gave from Gilead as far as the Valley of the Arnon, with the middle of the valley as a border, as far as the river Jabbok, the border of the Ammonites;
17 the Arabah also, with the Jordan river as the border, from Chinnereth as far as the Sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, below the slopes of Pisgah on the east.


18 I commanded you at that time, saying, "The Lord your God has given you this land to possess it. You shall cross over armed before your brothers, the sons of Israel, all the men of valor.
19 But your wives, your little ones, and your livestock (I know you have much livestock) shall remain in your cities that I have given you,
20 until the Lord gives rest to your brothers as to you, and they also possess the land that the Lord your God is giving them beyond the Jordan. Then each of you may return to his possession that I have given you."
21 I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, "Your eyes have seen all that the Lord your God has done to these two kings. So the Lord will do to all the kingdoms into which you are crossing.
22 You shall not fear them, for it is the Lord your God who fights for you."


23 I pleaded with the Lord at that time, saying,
24 "O Lord God, you have begun to show your servant your greatness and your mighty hand. For what god is there in heaven or on earth who can do such works and mighty acts as yours?
25 Please let me cross over and see the good land beyond the Jordan, that good hill country and Lebanon."
26 But the Lord was angry with me because of you and would not listen to me. The Lord said to me, "Enough from you; do not speak to me of this matter again.
27 Go up to the top of Pisgah and lift up your eyes to the west and north and south and east, and see it with your eyes, for you shall not cross over this Jordan.
28 But charge Joshua, and encourage him and strengthen him, for he shall go over at the head of this people, and he shall put them in possession of the land that you shall see."
29 So we remained in the valley opposite Beth-peor.
Chapter 4
1 Now, Israel, listen to the statutes and the judgments that I am teaching you to do, so that you may live and go in and possess the land that the Lord, the God of your fathers, is giving you.
2 You shall not add to the word that I am commanding you, nor shall you take away from it, so that you may keep the commandments of the Lord your God that I am commanding you.
3 Your eyes have seen what the Lord did at Baal-peor, for every man who followed Baal-peor, the Lord your God destroyed him from among you.
4 But you who held fast to the Lord your God are alive, every one of you, this day.
5 See, I have taught you statutes and judgments just as the Lord my God commanded me, so that you should do them in the land where you are entering to possess it.
6 So keep them and do them, for that is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, who will hear all these statutes and say, “Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.”
7 For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the Lord our God is to us whenever we call upon Him?
8 And what great nation is there that has statutes and judgments as righteous as all this law that I am setting before you today?


9 Only take care of yourself and guard your soul diligently, lest you forget the things that your eyes have seen, and lest they depart from your heart all the days of your life; but make them known to your sons and your sons’ sons—
10 the day that you stood before the Lord your God at Horeb, when the Lord said to me, “Assemble the people to Me, and I will make them hear My words, so that they may learn to fear Me all the days they live on the earth, and that they may teach their sons.”
11 And you came near and stood at the foot of the mountain, and the mountain burned with fire up to the heart of heaven—darkness, cloud, and thick gloom.
12 Then the Lord spoke to you from the midst of the fire; you heard the sound of words, but you saw no form—only a voice.
13 And He declared to you His covenant, which He commanded you to do—the Ten Commandments—and He wrote them on two tablets of stone.
14 The Lord also commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and judgments, so that you might do them in the land where you are crossing over to possess it.


15 So guard your souls carefully, for you saw no form on the day the Lord spoke to you at Horeb from the midst of the fire,
16 lest you act corruptly and make for yourselves a carved image in the form of any figure—the likeness of male or female,
17 the likeness of any animal that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the sky,
18 the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water below the earth.
19 And lest you lift up your eyes to heaven and see the sun and the moon and the stars—all the host of heaven—and be drawn away and worship them and serve them, which the Lord your God has allotted to all the nations under the whole heaven.
20 But the Lord has taken you and brought you out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be a people for His own possession, as you are this day.


21 Now the Lord was angry with me because of you, and He swore that I would not cross the Jordan and that I would not enter the good land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.
22 For I must die in this land; I shall not cross the Jordan, but you will cross over and possess that good land.
23 Take care of yourselves, lest you forget the covenant of the Lord your God that He made with you, and make for yourselves a carved image in the form of anything that the Lord your God has forbidden you.
24 For the Lord your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.


25 When you have sons and grandsons, and you have been long in the land, and you act corruptly and make a carved image in the form of anything, and do evil in the sight of the Lord your God to provoke Him to anger,
26 I call today on heaven and earth as witnesses against you, that you will surely perish quickly from the land where you are crossing the Jordan to possess it; you will not prolong your days on it, but you will be utterly destroyed.
27 And the Lord will scatter you among the nations, and you will be left few in number among the nations where the Lord will drive you.
28 And there you will serve gods, the work of a man’s hands, wood and stone, which neither see nor hear nor eat nor smell.
29 But from there you will seek the Lord your God, and you will find Him if you search for Him with all your heart and with all your soul.
30 When you are in distress and all these things have come upon you, in the later days, you will return to the Lord your God and listen to His voice.
31 For the Lord your God is a merciful God; He will not abandon you or destroy you or forget the covenant with your fathers that He swore to them.


32 For ask now about the former days that were before you, since the day that God created man on the earth, and from one end of heaven to the other, whether there has been anything like this great thing, or whether anything like it has been heard.
33 Has a people heard the voice of God speaking from the midst of the fire, as you have heard, and lived?
34 Or has a god tried to go and take for himself a nation from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs, by wonders, by war, by a mighty hand, by an outstretched arm, and by great terrors, as the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
35 To you it was shown, so that you might know that the Lord, He is God; there is no other besides Him.
36 From heaven He made you hear His voice to discipline you, and on earth He showed you His great fire, and you heard His words from the midst of the fire.
37 And because He loved your fathers, He chose their seed after them and brought you out of Egypt with His presence, with His great power,
38 driving out before you nations greater and mightier than you, to bring you in, to give you their land as an inheritance, as it is this day.
39 Know today, and take it to your heart, that the Lord, He is God in heaven above and on the earth below; there is no other.
40 So you shall keep His statutes and His commandments that I command you today, so that it may go well with you and with your sons after you, and that you may prolong your days on the land that the Lord your God is giving you forever.


41 Then Moses set apart three cities across the Jordan toward the sunrise,
42 so that a manslayer might flee there, one who kills his neighbor unintentionally, without hating him in the past, and by fleeing to one of these cities he might live:
43 Bezer in the wilderness on the plateau for the Reubenites, and Ramoth in Gilead for the Gadites, and Golan in Bashan for the Manassites.


44 And this is the law that Moses set before the sons of Israel.
45 These are the testimonies and the statutes and the judgments that Moses spoke to the sons of Israel when they came out of Egypt,
46 across the Jordan in the valley opposite Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who lived at Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel struck down when they came out of Egypt.
47 And they took possession of his land and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who were across the Jordan toward the sunrise,
48 from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of Arnon, even as far as Mount Sion (that is, Hermon),
49 and all the Arabah across the Jordan to the east, even as far as the sea of the Arabah, below the slopes of Pisgah.
Chapter 5
1 Moses called all Israel together and said to them, “Listen, Israel, to the statutes and regulations that I proclaim in your hearing today. Learn them and make sure to follow them carefully.
2 The Lord our God made a covenant with us at Horeb.
3 It wasn’t with our ancestors that the Lord made this covenant, but with us—those of us who are alive here today.
4 The Lord spoke to you face-to-face at the mountain, right out of the fire.
5 I stood between the Lord and you at that time to tell you what the Lord was saying, because you were afraid of the fire and didn’t go up the mountain. He said:


6 ‘I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
7 You must not have any other gods besides me.


8 You must not make for yourself an idol in the form of anything in heaven above, on the earth below, or in the waters beneath.
9 You must not bow down to them or worship them, because I, the Lord your God, am a jealous God. I bring the consequences of the parents’ sin onto the children to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me,
10 but I show faithful love to thousands of generations of those who love me and keep my commandments.


11 You must not misuse the name of the Lord your God, for the Lord will not let anyone go unpunished who misuses his name.


12 Observe the Sabbath day and keep it holy, just as the Lord your God commanded you.
13 Work for six days and do all your tasks,
14 but the seventh day is a Sabbath dedicated to the Lord your God. On it, you must not do any work—not you, your son, your daughter, your male or female servant, your ox, your donkey, any of your livestock, or the foreigner living in your towns—so that your male and female servants can rest just like you.
15 Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord your God brought you out of there with a strong hand and an outstretched arm. That’s why the Lord your God commanded you to observe the Sabbath day.


16 Honor your father and your mother, as the Lord your God commanded you, so that you may live a long life and things may go well for you in the land the Lord your God is giving you.


17 You must not murder.


18 You must not commit adultery.


19 You must not steal.


20 You must not give false testimony against your neighbor.


21 You must not covet your neighbor’s wife. You must not desire your neighbor’s house, his field, his male or female servant, his ox, his donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.’


22 These are the words the Lord spoke to your whole assembly at the mountain. He spoke from the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness with a loud voice, and he added nothing more. He wrote them on two stone tablets and gave them to me.
23 When you heard the voice coming from the darkness while the mountain was burning with fire, you—all your tribal leaders and elders—came up to me.
24 You said, ‘Look, the Lord our God has shown us his glory and greatness, and we’ve heard his voice from the fire. Today we’ve seen that a person can live even after God speaks with them.
25 But now, why should we die? This massive fire will consume us! If we keep hearing the voice of the Lord our God, we’ll die.
26 Has any human ever heard the voice of the living God speaking from the middle of the fire, like we have, and survived?
27 You go near and listen to everything the Lord our God says, then tell us whatever the Lord our God tells you. We’ll listen and obey.’


28 The Lord heard what you said when you spoke to me, and the Lord said to me, ‘I’ve heard the words these people have spoken to you. Everything they’ve said is right.
29 If only they would always have this kind of heart—one that fears me and keeps all my commandments—so that things would go well for them and their children forever!
30 Go tell them, “Return to your tents.”
31 But you, stay here with me, and I’ll give you all the commandments, statutes, and regulations you’re to teach them, so they can follow them in the land I’m giving them to possess.’


32 So be careful to do exactly what the Lord your God has commanded you—don’t turn aside to the right or the left.
33 Walk in all the ways the Lord your God has commanded you, so that you may live, prosper, and enjoy a long life in the land you’re about to possess.
Chapter 6
1 These are the commands, statutes, and judgments that the Lord your God has ordered me to teach you, so that you may obey them in the land you are crossing over to possess,
2 that you may fear the Lord your God by keeping all his statutes and commands that I am giving you—you, your son, and your grandson—all the days of your life, and that your days may be prolonged.
3 Hear therefore, O Israel, and be careful to do them, that it may go well with you, and that you may multiply greatly, as the Lord, the God of your fathers, has promised you, in a land flowing with milk and honey.


4 Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one.
5 You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your strength.
6 These words that I command you today shall be on your heart.
7 You shall teach them diligently to your sons and shall talk of them when you sit in your house, when you walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you rise up.
8 You shall bind them as a sign on your hand, and they shall be as frontlets between your eyes.
9 You shall write them on the doorposts of your house and on your gates.


10 When the Lord your God brings you into the land that he swore to your fathers—to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob—to give you, with great and good cities that you did not build,
11 houses full of all good things that you did not fill, cisterns dug out that you did not dig, vineyards and olive trees that you did not plant—and you eat and are satisfied,
12 then watch yourself, lest you forget the Lord who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery.
13 You shall fear the Lord your God; him you shall serve, and by his name you shall swear.
14 You shall not go after other gods, the gods of the peoples who are around you—
15 for the Lord your God in your midst is a jealous God—lest the anger of the Lord your God be kindled against you, and he destroy you from the face of the earth.


16 You shall not test the Lord your God, as you tested him at Massah.
17 You shall diligently keep the commands of the Lord your God, his testimonies, and his statutes that he has commanded you.
18 You shall do what is right and good in the sight of the Lord, that it may go well with you, and that you may go in and possess the good land that the Lord swore to your fathers to give you,
19 by driving out all your enemies from before you, as the Lord has spoken.


20 When your son asks you in time to come, saying, ‘What are the testimonies, statutes, and judgments that the Lord our God has commanded you?’
21 then you shall say to your son, ‘We were slaves of Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
22 The Lord showed signs and wonders, great and grievous, against Egypt, against Pharaoh, and against all his household, before our eyes.
23 He brought us out from there, that he might bring us in to give us the land that he swore to our fathers to give us.
24 The Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is this day.
25 It will be righteousness for us if we are careful to do all this commandment before the Lord our God, as he has commanded us.’
Chapter 7
1 When the Lord your God brings you into the land you’re about to enter and take possession of, he will drive out many nations before you: the Hittites, Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and Jebusites—seven nations larger and stronger than you.
2 When the Lord your God hands them over to you and you defeat them, you must completely destroy them. Don’t make any treaties with them or show them any mercy.
3 Don’t intermarry with them—don’t give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons,
4 because they’ll turn your children away from following me to serve other gods. Then the Lord’s anger will burn against you, and he’ll quickly destroy you.
5 Instead, this is what you should do to them: tear down their altars, smash their sacred stones, cut down their Asherah poles, and burn their carved idols with fire.
6 You are a holy people belonging to the Lord your God. Out of all the peoples on the face of the earth, the Lord your God has chosen you to be his treasured possession.


7 It wasn’t because you were more numerous than other peoples that the Lord set his affection on you and chose you—after all, you were the smallest of all peoples.
8 But it was because the Lord loved you and kept the oath he swore to your ancestors that he brought you out with a mighty hand and redeemed you from slavery, from the power of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.
9 Know this: the Lord your God is God, the faithful God who keeps his covenant of love for a thousand generations with those who love him and obey his commands.
10 But he repays those who hate him, right to their faces by destroying them; he won’t delay with anyone who hates him—he’ll repay them directly.
11 So keep the commands, decrees, and laws I command you today and follow them.


12 If you listen to these laws and are careful to follow them, the Lord your God will keep his covenant of love with you, just as he swore to your ancestors.
13 He will love you, bless you, and increase your numbers. He’ll bless the children you bear, the crops of your land—your grain, new wine, and olive oil—and the calves of your herds and the lambs of your flocks in the land he swore to your ancestors to give you.
14 You’ll be blessed more than any other people; none of your men or women will be childless, nor will any of your livestock be barren.
15 The Lord will keep every disease away from you, and he won’t bring on you any of the terrible sicknesses you knew in Egypt—he’ll put them on all who hate you instead.
16 You must destroy all the peoples the Lord your God hands over to you. Don’t look on them with pity, and don’t serve their gods, because that will trap you.


17 You might say to yourself, “These nations are stronger than we are—how can we drive them out?”
18 But don’t be afraid of them. Remember what the Lord your God did to Pharaoh and all Egypt:
19 the great trials you saw with your own eyes, the signs, the wonders, the mighty hand, and the outstretched arm by which the Lord your God brought you out. He’ll do the same to all the peoples you’re afraid of now.
20 The Lord your God will even send the hornet against them until those who are left and hiding from you are wiped out.
21 Don’t be terrified of them, because the Lord your God, who is among you, is a great and awesome God.
22 The Lord your God will drive out those nations before you little by little. You won’t be able to finish them off all at once, or the wild animals will multiply too much for you.
23 But the Lord your God will deliver them over to you and throw them into total panic until they’re destroyed.
24 He’ll hand their kings over to you, and you’ll wipe out their names from under heaven. No one will be able to stand against you until you’ve destroyed them.
25 Burn the carved idols of their gods with fire. Don’t covet the silver or gold on them or take it for yourselves, or you’ll be ensnared by it—it’s detestable to the Lord your God.
26 Don’t bring anything detestable into your house, or you’ll be marked for destruction just like it. Consider it utterly repulsive and detestable, because it’s set apart for destruction.
Chapter 8
1 "You must be careful to follow every commandment that I command you today, so that you can live, grow in number, and enter and take possession of the land that the Lord promised to your ancestors.
2 Remember how the Lord your God led you through the wilderness these past forty years, to humble you and test you, to find out what was in your heart—whether you’d keep His commands or not.
3 He humbled you by letting you go hungry, then fed you with manna, something neither you nor your ancestors had ever known, to teach you that people don’t live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth of the Lord.
4 Your clothes didn’t wear out, and your feet didn’t swell during those forty years.
5 So, understand this in your heart: just as a parent disciplines their child, the Lord your God disciplines you."


6 "So keep the commandments of the Lord your God by walking in His ways and respecting Him.
7 Because the Lord your God is bringing you into a good land—a land with streams, springs, and deep waters flowing through hills and valleys,
8 a land of wheat, barley, vines, fig trees, pomegranates, olive oil, and honey,
9 a land where you’ll eat without scarcity, where you won’t lack anything, a land whose rocks are iron and whose hills you can mine for copper.
10 When you’ve eaten and are satisfied, praise the Lord your God for the good land He’s given you."


11 "But be careful not to forget the Lord your God by failing to keep His commandments, laws, and decrees that I command you today.
12 Otherwise, when you’ve eaten your fill, built nice houses to live in,
13 and your herds and flocks multiply, your silver and gold increase, and everything you have grows,
14 your heart might become proud, and you could forget the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the slave house.
15 He led you through the vast, terrifying wilderness with its venomous snakes and scorpions, a dry place with no water, where He brought water out of solid rock for you.
16 He fed you manna in the wilderness, something your ancestors had never seen, to humble you and test you, so that in the end it would go well with you.
17 Don’t ever think to yourself, ‘My own power and the strength of my hands made all this wealth for me.’
18 Instead, remember the Lord your God, because He’s the one who gives you the ability to produce wealth, confirming His covenant that He swore to your ancestors, as it stands today."


19 "But if you ever forget the Lord your God and chase after other gods, worshiping and bowing to them, I testify against you today, that you will certainly be destroyed.
20 Like the nations the Lord is wiping out before you, that’s how you’ll be destroyed if you don’t obey the Lord your God."
Chapter 9
1 Listen, Israel: You’re about to cross the Jordan today to go in and take over nations bigger and stronger than you—cities with massive, sky-high walls.
2 The people there are the Anakites, huge and tall. You’ve heard the saying, “Who can stand up to the Anakites?”
3 But know today, that the Lord your God is the one crossing ahead of you like a consuming fire. He’ll destroy them and bring them down before you. You’ll drive them out and wipe them out fast, just as the Lord promised you.


4 When the Lord your God pushes them out in front of you, don’t think to yourself, “It’s because I’m so righteous that the Lord brought me here to take this land.” No, it’s because of how wicked these nations are that the Lord is driving them out before you.
5 It’s not your righteousness or your upright character that’s getting you this land to possess. It’s because of the wickedness of these nations that the Lord your God is forcing them out ahead of you—and to keep the promise He swore to your ancestors, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
6 So get this straight: the Lord your God isn’t giving you this good land to possess because you’re righteous. You’re a stubborn, stiff-necked people.


7 Remember—don’t forget—how you provoked the Lord your God to anger in the wilderness. From the day you left Egypt until you got here, you’ve been rebellious against the Lord.
8 Even at Horeb, you made the Lord so furious that He was ready to destroy you.
9 When I went up the mountain to get the stone tablets—the tablets of the covenant the Lord made with you—I stayed there forty days and forty nights, not eating bread or drinking water.
10 The Lord gave me the two stone tablets, written by God’s own finger, with everything He said to you on the mountain from the fire on the day of the assembly.


11 After those forty days and nights, the Lord handed me the two stone tablets, the tablets of the covenant.
12 Then the Lord said to me, “Get up, head down from here quick, because the people you brought out of Egypt have ruined everything. They’ve already turned away from the way I commanded them and made themselves a cast-metal idol.”
13 The Lord also told me, “I’ve seen this people, and they’re a stubborn, stiff-necked bunch.
14 Leave me alone so I can destroy them and erase their name from under heaven. Then I’ll make you into a nation stronger and bigger than they are.”


15 So I turned and came down the mountain while it was still blazing with fire, holding the two tablets of the covenant in my hands.
16 And I saw it—you’d sinned against the Lord your God. You’d made yourselves a cast-metal calf, quickly abandoning the way the Lord had commanded you.
17 I grabbed the two tablets and threw them down, smashing them right in front of you.
18 Then I fell down before the Lord like before, for forty days and forty nights, not eating bread or drinking water, because of all the sin you’d committed—doing what was evil in the Lord’s eyes and provoking Him to anger.
19 I was terrified of the Lord’s burning anger, how furious He was, ready to destroy you. But the Lord listened to me that time too.


20 The Lord was also furious enough with Aaron to destroy him, but I prayed for Aaron at the same time.
21 As for that sinful thing you made—the calf—I took it, burned it in the fire, crushed it, and ground it into fine dust. Then I threw the dust into the stream running down the mountain.


22 You also provoked the Lord at Taberah, at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah.
23 And when the Lord sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, “Go up and take the land I’ve given you,” you rebelled against the command of the Lord your God. You didn’t trust Him or listen to Him.
24 You’ve been rebellious against the Lord ever since I’ve known you.


25 So I fell down before the Lord for those forty days and forty nights because the Lord had said He’d destroy you.
26 I prayed to the Lord and said, “Lord God, don’t destroy Your people, Your inheritance that You redeemed with Your greatness, the ones You brought out of Egypt with a strong hand.
27 Remember Your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Don’t focus on the stubbornness of this people, their wickedness, or their sin,
28 or else the land we came from will say, ‘The Lord couldn’t bring them into the land He promised, and He hated them, so He brought them out to kill them in the wilderness.’
29 But they’re Your people, Your inheritance, the ones You brought out with Your great power and outstretched arm.”
Chapter 10
1 At that time, the Lord said to me, “Carve out two stone tablets like the first ones, and come up to me on the mountain. Also, make a wooden chest.
2 I’ll write on the tablets the words that were on the first ones, which you broke, and you’ll place them in the chest.”
3 So I made a chest out of acacia wood, carved two stone tablets like the originals, and went up the mountain with the tablets in my hands.
4 Then the Lord wrote on the tablets the same words as before—the Ten Commandments He had spoken to you on the mountain from the middle of the fire on the day of the assembly. After that, He gave them to me.
5 I turned and came down the mountain and put the tablets in the chest I had made, just as the Lord commanded me. They’re still there today.


6 Now, the Israelites traveled from the wells of the Bene-jaakan to Moserah. That’s where Aaron died and was buried, and his son Eleazar took over as priest in his place.
7 From there, they moved on to Gudgodah, and then to Jotbathah, a land with flowing streams.
8 At that time, the Lord set apart the tribe of Levi to carry the chest of the Lord’s covenant, to stand before Him and serve Him, and to bless people in His name—a role they still have today.
9 That’s why Levi doesn’t get a share of land or inheritance like the other tribes; the Lord Himself is their inheritance, just as He promised them.


10 I stayed on the mountain forty days and forty nights, just like the first time. The Lord listened to me again and decided not to destroy you.
11 Then the Lord said to me, “Get up and go lead the people on their journey, so they can enter and take possession of the land I swore to their ancestors I’d give them.”


12 So now, Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you? Only this: to respect the Lord your God, to follow all His ways, to love Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and soul,
13 keeping His commandments and laws that I command you today for your own good.
14 Look, the heavens, even the highest heavens, the earth, and everything in them belong to the Lord your God.
15 Yet the Lord chose your ancestors to love them, and He picked their descendants—you—above all other nations, as you see today.
16 So circumcise your hearts and stop being stubborn,
17 because the Lord your God is the God of gods and Lord of lords—the great, mighty, and awesome God who doesn’t play favorites or take bribes.
18 He defends the cause of orphans and widows, and He loves the foreigner living among you, giving them food and clothing.
19 You’re to love the foreigner too, since you were foreigners in Egypt.
20 Respect the Lord your God, serve Him, stay close to Him, and swear by His name.
21 He’s your praise; He’s your God who did these great and awesome things for you that you’ve seen with your own eyes.
22 Your ancestors went down to Egypt as a group of seventy, and now the Lord your God has made you as numerous as the stars in the sky.
Chapter 11
1 You must love the Lord your God and always keep His requirements, His statutes, His judgments, and His commandments.
2 Recognize today—since I’m not speaking to your children who haven’t experienced or witnessed it—the discipline of the Lord your God, His greatness, His strong hand, and His outstretched arm,
3 His signs and His deeds that He performed in Egypt against Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, and his entire land,
4 and what He did to Egypt’s army, to their horses and chariots, when He made the waters of the Red Sea overwhelm them as they chased after you, and the Lord destroyed them completely up to this day.
5 Also consider what He did for you in the wilderness until you arrived at this place,
6 and what He did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab from the tribe of Reuben, when the earth opened its mouth and swallowed them, their households, their tents, and everything they owned, right in the middle of all Israel.
7 Your own eyes have seen all these great acts of the Lord.


8 So keep every commandment I’m giving you today, so that you may have the strength to go in and take possession of the land you’re about to enter,
9 and so that you may live long in the land the Lord swore to your ancestors to give them and their descendants—a land flowing with milk and honey.
10 The land you’re about to enter and possess isn’t like the land of Egypt, where you came from, where you had to sow your seed and irrigate it by foot, like a vegetable garden.
11 No, the land you’re crossing into is a land of hills and valleys; it drinks water from the rain of heaven.
12 It’s a land the Lord your God cares for; the eyes of the Lord your God are always on it, from the beginning of the year to its end.


13 If you faithfully obey the commandments that I command you today—to love the Lord your God and serve Him with all your heart and all your soul—
14 then He will provide rain for your land in its season, the early rain and the late rain, so you can gather your grain, your new wine, and your oil.
15 He’ll also make grass grow in your fields for your livestock, and you’ll eat and be satisfied.
16 But be careful, or your hearts might be deceived, and you’ll turn away to serve other gods and worship them.
17 Then the Lord’s anger will burn against you; He’ll shut up the heavens so there’s no rain, the land won’t yield its produce, and you’ll quickly perish from the good land the Lord is giving you.


18 So take these words of mine to heart and soul; tie them as a sign on your hands and let them be a reminder on your foreheads.
19 Teach them to your children, talking about them when you’re sitting at home, when you’re walking along the road, when you lie down, and when you get up.
20 Write them on the doorposts of your houses and on your gates,
21 so that your days and the days of your children may be many in the land the Lord swore to give your ancestors, as long as the heavens remain above the earth.


22 If you diligently keep all these commandments I’m giving you—loving the Lord your God, walking in all His ways, and holding fast to Him—
23 then the Lord will drive out all these nations before you, and you’ll dispossess nations greater and stronger than you.
24 Every place where the sole of your foot steps will be yours; your territory will stretch from the wilderness to Lebanon, and from the Euphrates River to the western sea.
25 No one will be able to stand against you; the Lord your God will put fear and dread of you on all the land you tread, just as He promised you.


26 Look, today I’m setting before you a blessing and a curse:
27 the blessing if you obey the commandments of the Lord your God that I’m giving you today,
28 and the curse if you don’t obey the commandments of the Lord your God and turn from the way I’m commanding you today, following other gods you haven’t known.
29 When the Lord your God brings you into the land you’re about to possess, you must pronounce the blessing on Mount Gerizim and the curse on Mount Ebal.
30 Aren’t these mountains across the Jordan, west of the road toward the sunset, in the land of the Canaanites who live in the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, near the oaks of Moreh?
31 You’re about to cross the Jordan to enter and possess the land the Lord your God is giving you; you’ll take it and live in it.
32 So be careful to follow all the statutes and judgments I’m setting before you today.




Chapter 12


1 These are the statutes and ordinances that you must diligently observe in the land that the Lord, the God of your ancestors, has given you to possess, all the days that you live on the earth.
2 You must completely destroy all the places where the nations you are dispossessing worshiped their gods—on the high mountains, on the hills, and under every green tree.
3 Tear down their altars, smash their sacred pillars, burn their Asherah poles with fire, and chop down the carved images of their gods. Wipe out their names from that place.
4 Do not worship the Lord your God in the same way they did.
5 Instead, seek the Lord at the place that the Lord your God will choose out of all your tribes to establish his name there as his dwelling, and go there.
6 Bring there your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contributions of your hand, your vowed offerings, your freewill offerings, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks.
7 There, in the presence of the Lord your God, you and your households will eat and rejoice in all the work of your hands, because the Lord your God has blessed you.


8 You must not do as we are doing here today, where everyone does whatever seems right in their own eyes,
9 for you have not yet come to the resting place and the inheritance that the Lord your God is giving you.
10 But when you cross the Jordan and settle in the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and he gives you rest from all your enemies around you so that you live in safety,
11 then to the place that the Lord your God will choose to make his name dwell there, you must bring everything I command you: your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes, the contributions of your hand, and all your choice vowed offerings that you vow to the Lord.
12 You will rejoice before the Lord your God—you, your sons, your daughters, your male and female servants, and the Levite who is within your towns, since he has no portion or inheritance with you.


13 Be careful not to offer your burnt offerings in just any place you see,
14 but only at the place the Lord will choose in one of your tribes. There you must offer your burnt offerings and do everything I command you.
15 However, whenever you desire, you may slaughter and eat meat within any of your towns, according to the blessing the Lord your God has given you. Both the unclean and the clean may eat it, as they would the gazelle or the deer.
16 Only you must not eat the blood; pour it out on the ground like water.
17 You are not permitted to eat within your towns the tithe of your grain, new wine, or oil, or the firstborn of your herds or flocks, or any of your vowed offerings that you vow, or your freewill offerings, or the contributions of your hand.
18 Instead, you must eat them before the Lord your God at the place the Lord your God will choose—you, your son, your daughter, your male and female servants, and the Levite who is within your towns—and you will rejoice before the Lord your God in all the work of your hands.
19 Be careful not to neglect the Levite as long as you live in your land.


20 When the Lord your God enlarges your territory, as he has promised you, and you say, “I want to eat meat,” because you crave meat, then you may eat meat whenever you desire.
21 If the place where the Lord your God chooses to put his name is too far from you, then you may slaughter animals from your herds and flocks that the Lord has given you, as I have commanded you, and you may eat within your towns whenever you desire.
22 Just as the gazelle and the deer are eaten, so you may eat it; the unclean and the clean alike may eat it.
23 Only be sure not to eat the blood, for the blood is the life, and you must not eat the life with the meat.
24 Do not eat it; pour it out on the ground like water.
25 Do not eat it, so that it may go well with you and your children after you, because you will be doing what is right in the sight of the Lord.


26 But the holy things that belong to you and your vowed offerings you must take and go to the place that the Lord will choose.
27 Present your burnt offerings—the meat and the blood—on the altar of the Lord your God; the blood of your sacrifices shall be poured out on the altar of the Lord your God, but the meat you may eat.
28 Be careful to obey all these words that I command you, so that it may go well with you and your children after you forever, because you will be doing what is good and right in the sight of the Lord your God.


29 When the Lord your God cuts off the nations before you, where you are going to dispossess them, and you dispossess them and dwell in their land,
30 be careful not to be ensnared by following them, after they have been destroyed before you, and do not inquire about their gods, saying, “How did these nations serve their gods? I will do the same.”
31 You must not worship the Lord your God in that way, for every abominable thing that the Lord hates they have done for their gods, even burning their sons and daughters in the fire to their gods.


32 Everything that I command you, you must be careful to do; you shall not add to it or take away from it.




Chapter 13


1 If a prophet or someone who interprets dreams arises among you and promises you a sign or wonder,
2 and that sign or wonder they spoke about actually happens, and then they say, "Let’s follow other gods" (gods you’ve never known) "and worship them,"
3 you must not listen to what that prophet or dream-interpreter says. The Lord your God is testing you to find out whether you truly love Him with all your heart and all your soul.
4 You are to follow the Lord your God and revere Him. Keep His commands and obey His voice; serve Him and stay loyal to Him.
5 That prophet or dream-interpreter must be put to death because they’ve preached rebellion against the Lord your God—who brought you out of Egypt and redeemed you from slavery—to pull you away from the path the Lord your God commanded you to walk. You must purge this evil from among you.


6 If your own brother (your mother’s son), or your son, daughter, the wife you love, or your closest friend secretly tries to convince you, saying, "Let’s go worship other gods" (gods neither you nor your ancestors have known,
7 gods of the peoples around you, whether near or far, from one end of the earth to the other),
8 do not give in to them or listen to them. Don’t let your eye spare them; don’t show pity or shield them.
9 You must surely kill them. Your hand must be the first to strike them down, followed by the hands of all the people.
10 Stone them to death, because they tried to turn you away from the Lord your God, who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery.
11 Then all Israel will hear about it and be afraid, and no one will dare to do such an evil thing among you again.


12 If you hear a report about one of your towns that the Lord your God is giving you to live in, saying,
13 "Some wicked people have come out from among you and have led the town’s residents astray, saying, ‘Let’s go worship other gods,’" (gods you’ve never known)
14 then you must investigate thoroughly and carefully. If it’s true and confirmed that such a detestable thing has happened among you,
15 you must absolutely strike down the inhabitants of that town with the sword. Devote it and everything in it—including its livestock—to total destruction.
16 Gather all its plunder into the middle of the town square and burn the town completely, along with all its goods, as a whole burnt offering to the Lord your God. It will remain a ruin forever, never to be rebuilt.
17 Don’t let any of the devoted things stick to your hands, so that the Lord may turn from His fierce anger, show you mercy, have compassion on you, and multiply you, just as He swore to your ancestors—
18 but only if you obey the Lord your God, keeping all His commands that I’m giving you today and doing what is right in the sight of the Lord your God.




Chapter 14


1 You are the children of the Lord your God. Do not cut yourselves or shave the front of your heads for the sake of the dead,
2 because you are a people holy to the Lord your God. Out of all the peoples on the face of the earth, the Lord has chosen you to be His treasured possession.


3 Do not eat anything detestable.
4 These are the animals you may eat: the ox, the sheep, the goat,
5 the deer, the gazelle, the roe deer, the wild goat, the ibex, the antelope, and the mountain sheep.
6 You may eat any animal that has a divided hoof split into two parts and that chews the cud.
7 However, of those that chew the cud or have a divided hoof, you may not eat the camel, the rabbit, or the rock hyrax. Although they chew the cud, they do not have a divided hoof; they are unclean for you.
8 The pig is also unclean for you; though it has a divided hoof, it does not chew the cud. You must not eat their meat or touch their carcasses.


9 Of all the creatures living in the water, you may eat any that have fins and scales.
10 But anything that does not have fins and scales you may not eat; it is unclean for you.


11 You may eat any clean bird.
12 But these are the ones you may not eat: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture,
13 the red kite, the black kite, any kind of falcon,
14 any kind of raven,
15 the horned owl, the screech owl, the gull, any kind of hawk,
16 the little owl, the great owl, the white owl,
17 the desert owl, the osprey, the cormorant,
18 the stork, any kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat.


19 All winged insects are unclean for you; do not eat them.
20 But any clean winged creature you may eat.


21 Do not eat anything you find already dead. You may give it to the foreigner residing in your towns, and they may eat it, or you may sell it to a foreigner. But you are a people holy to the Lord your God. Do not cook a young goat in its mother’s milk.


22 Be sure to set aside a tenth of all that your fields produce each year.
23 Eat the tithe of your grain, new wine, and olive oil, and the firstborn of your herds and flocks in the presence of the Lord your God at the place He will choose as a dwelling for His Name, so that you may learn to revere the Lord your God always.
24 But if that place is too distant and you have been blessed by the Lord your God and cannot carry your tithe because the place where the Lord will choose to put His Name is too far away,
25 then exchange your tithe for silver, and take the silver with you and go to the place the Lord your God will choose.
26 Use the silver to buy whatever you like: cattle, sheep, wine, or other fermented drink, or anything you wish. Then you and your household shall eat there in the presence of the Lord your God and rejoice.
27 And do not neglect the Levites living in your towns, for they have no allotment or inheritance of their own.


28 At the end of every three years, bring all the tithes of that year’s produce and store it in your towns,
29 so that the Levites (who have no allotment or inheritance of their own) and the foreigners, the fatherless, and the widows who live in your towns may come and eat and be satisfied, and so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.


Chapter 15


1 Every seven years, you must cancel debts.
2 This is how it works: every creditor must release what they have loaned to their neighbor. They must not press their neighbor or fellow Israelite for payment, because the Lord’s time for canceling debts has been announced.
3 You may press a foreigner for payment, but whatever you have lent to your fellow Israelite, you must release.
4 However, there should be no poor among you, because the Lord will richly bless you in the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess—
5 if only you fully obey the Lord your God and carefully follow all these commands I am giving you today.
6 For the Lord your God will bless you as He has promised: you will lend to many nations but borrow from none; you will rule over many nations, but they will not rule over you.


7 If there is a poor person among you—one of your fellow Israelites in any of your towns in the land the Lord your God is giving you—do not harden your heart or close your hand against them.
8 Instead, open your hand generously and lend them whatever they need.
9 Be careful not to harbor this wicked thought: “The seventh year, the year of debt cancellation, is near,” and then look stingily at your poor fellow Israelite and give them nothing. They might cry out to the Lord against you, and you would be guilty of sin.
10 Give to them generously and without a grudging heart, because for this the Lord your God will bless you in all your work and in everything you undertake.
11 There will always be poor people in the land, so I command you to be open-handed toward your fellow Israelites who are poor and needy in your land.


12 If a fellow Hebrew, whether a man or a woman, sells themselves to you, they will serve you for six years. In the seventh year, you must set them free.
13 When you release them, do not send them away empty-handed.
14 Provide for them generously from your flock, your threshing floor, and your winepress; give to them as the Lord your God has blessed you.
15 Remember that you were slaves in Egypt, and the Lord your God redeemed you; that is why I am giving you this command today.
16 But if your servant says to you, “I don’t want to leave you,” because they love you and your household and are well off with you,
17 then take an awl and pierce it through their ear into the door, and they will become your servant for life. Do the same for a female servant.
18 Do not consider it a hardship to set your servant free, because their service to you for six years was worth twice as much as a hired worker. Then the Lord your God will bless you in all you do.


19 Set apart for the Lord your God every firstborn male of your herds and flocks. Do not put the firstborn of your cattle to work, and do not shear the firstborn of your sheep.
20 Each year, you and your household are to eat them in the presence of the Lord your God at the place He will choose.
21 If an animal has a defect—is lame or blind, or has any serious flaw—you must not sacrifice it to the Lord your God.
22 You may eat it within your towns; both the ceremonially unclean and the clean may eat it, as they would a gazelle or deer.
23 But you must not eat its blood; pour it out on the ground like water.




Chapter 16


1 Observe the month of Aviv and celebrate the Passover to the Lord your God, because it was in the month of Aviv that the Lord your God brought you out of Egypt at night.
2 You must sacrifice the Passover offering to the Lord your God from the flock or the herd in the place where the Lord chooses to establish his name.
3 Do not eat it with anything leavened; for seven days, eat unleavened bread with it—the bread of affliction—since you left the land of Egypt in a hurry. This will help you remember the day you came out of Egypt all the days of your life.
4 No leaven should be seen among you in all your territory for seven days, and none of the meat you sacrifice on the evening of the first day should remain until morning.
5 You are not allowed to sacrifice the Passover offering within any of your towns that the Lord your God gives you;
6 rather, it must be sacrificed at the place where the Lord your God chooses to establish his name. There you shall offer the Passover sacrifice in the evening, at sunset, the time when you came out of Egypt.
7 Cook it and eat it in the place the Lord your God chooses, then in the morning you may return to your tents.
8 For six days you must eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day hold a solemn assembly to the Lord your God; do no work on it.


9 Count off seven weeks for yourself; begin counting the seven weeks from the time you first put the sickle to the standing grain.
10 Then celebrate the Festival of Weeks to the Lord your God with a freewill offering in proportion to how the Lord your God has blessed you.
11 Rejoice before the Lord your God—you, your son, your daughter, your male and female servants, the Levite within your towns, the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow among you—at the place where the Lord your God chooses to establish his name.
12 Remember that you were a slave in Egypt, and carefully follow these statutes.


13 Celebrate the Festival of Booths for seven days after you have gathered the produce from your threshing floor and your winepress.
14 Rejoice during your festival—you, your son, your daughter, your male and female servants, the Levite, the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow within your towns.
15 For seven days, keep the festival to the Lord your God at the place the Lord chooses, because the Lord your God will bless you in all your harvest and in all the work of your hands, and you will be filled with joy.
16 Three times a year all your males must appear before the Lord your God at the place he chooses: at the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the Festival of Weeks, and the Festival of Booths. They must not appear before the Lord empty-handed;
17 each man should give according to what he has, in proportion to the blessing the Lord your God has given you.


18 Appoint judges and officials for yourself in all your towns that the Lord your God is giving you, according to your tribes, and they must judge the people with righteous judgment.
19 Do not pervert justice, show partiality, or accept a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise and twists the words of the righteous.
20 Pursue justice and only justice, so that you may live and possess the land the Lord your God is giving you.


21 Do not set up any wooden Asherah pole beside the altar of the Lord your God that you make for yourself,
22 nor erect a sacred stone pillar, which the Lord your God hates.




Chapter 17


1 You must not sacrifice to the Lord your God an ox or a sheep that has any defect or serious flaw, because that is detestable to the Lord your God.


2 If a man or woman is found among you, in one of the towns the Lord your God is giving you, who does what is evil in the sight of the Lord your God by violating His covenant,
3 and they go and serve other gods and bow down to them—or to the sun, the moon, or any of the heavenly bodies, which I have forbidden—
4 and you are told about it, then you must investigate it thoroughly. If it is confirmed and proven true that such a detestable thing has been done in Israel,
5 then you must bring that man or woman who has done this wicked thing out to your city gates—that man or that woman—and stone them to death.
6 On the testimony of two or three witnesses, the one who is to die must be put to death; they must not be executed on the testimony of a single witness.
7 The hands of the witnesses must be the first to stone them, and then the hands of all the people afterward. In this way, you will purge the evil from among you.


8 If a case arises in one of your towns that is too difficult for you to judge—whether it involves a homicide, a legal dispute, or an assault—and it is a matter of contention, then you must go up to the place the Lord your God will choose.
9 You shall approach the Levitical priests and the judge who is in office at that time, and you shall inquire of them, and they will give you the legal decision.
10 You must act according to the decision they give you from that place the Lord will choose, and you must be careful to do everything they instruct you.
11 You must follow the legal ruling they provide and the verdict they declare to you without turning aside to the right or to the left from what they tell you.
12 But if a man acts presumptuously and refuses to listen to the priest who stands there to serve the Lord your God, or to the judge, that man must die. So you will purge the evil from Israel.
13 Then all the people will hear about it and be afraid, and they will no longer act presumptuously.


14 When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you and take possession of it and settle in it, and you say, “I will appoint a king over me like all the nations around me,”
15 you may indeed appoint a king over you whom the Lord your God will choose. He must be one of your own brothers; you must not place a foreigner over you who is not your brother.
16 However, he must not acquire many horses for himself or send the people back to Egypt to acquire more horses, for the Lord has said to you, “You must never return that way again.”
17 He must not take many wives for himself, so that his heart does not turn away, nor must he amass great amounts of silver and gold for himself.
18 When he sits on the throne of his kingdom, he must write for himself a copy of this law on a scroll in the presence of the Levitical priests.
19 It must remain with him, and he must read it all the days of his life, so that he may learn to fear the Lord his God by keeping all the words of this law and these statutes and doing them.
20 This will ensure that his heart does not become arrogant above his brothers and that he does not turn aside from the commandment to the right or to the left, so that he and his sons may reign long over his kingdom in Israel.




Chapter 18


1 The Levitical priests, that is, the entire tribe of Levi, will not have a share or inheritance with the rest of Israel. Instead, they will eat the offerings made by fire to the Lord, which are their inheritance.
2 They will not possess any land among their fellow Israelites; the Lord himself is their inheritance, just as he promised them.


3 This is the portion due to the priests from the people—those who offer a sacrifice, whether it’s an ox or a sheep: they must give the priest the shoulder, the jowls, and the stomach.
4 You must also give them the first portion of your grain, new wine, and olive oil, as well as the first fleece from your sheep.
5 For the Lord your God has chosen them and their descendants out of all your tribes to stand and serve in the Lord’s name forever.


6 If a Levite decides to leave one of your towns, wherever he has been living in Israel, and comes to the place the Lord will choose, out of his own desire,
7 he may serve in the name of the Lord his God just like all his fellow Levites who stand there before the Lord.
8 He is entitled to an equal share of the provisions, regardless of any income he might have from selling family property.


9 When you enter the land the Lord your God is giving you, do not imitate the detestable practices of the nations there.
10 No one among you should ever sacrifice their son or daughter in the fire, practice divination, interpret omens, engage in witchcraft,
11 cast spells, consult a medium or spiritist, or attempt to summon the dead.
12 Anyone who does these things is abhorrent to the Lord, and it’s because of these detestable practices that the Lord your God is driving those nations out before you.
13 You must be blameless before the Lord your God.


14 Although these nations you’re about to displace listen to fortune-tellers and diviners, the Lord your God has not permitted you to do the same.
15 Instead, the Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your own people—you must listen to him.
16 This is exactly what you asked for from the Lord your God at Horeb on the day of the assembly, when you said, “Let us not hear the voice of the Lord our God again or see this great fire anymore, or we will die.”


17 The Lord said to me, “What they’ve said is good.
18 I will raise up a prophet for them from among their own people, like you, and I will put my words in his mouth. He will speak to them everything I command him.
19 If anyone does not listen to my words that the prophet speaks in my name, I myself will hold them accountable.
20 But if a prophet presumes to speak a message in my name that I haven’t commanded, or speaks in the name of other gods, that prophet must die.”


21 You might wonder, “How can we know if a message hasn’t been spoken by the Lord?”
22 If a prophet speaks in the Lord’s name and the prediction doesn’t come true or happen, that’s a message the Lord didn’t speak. The prophet has spoken arrogantly, and you don’t need to fear him.




Chapter 19


1 When the Lord your God cuts off the nations whose land the Lord your God is giving you, and you dispossess them and settle in their cities and in their houses, 2 you shall set apart three cities for yourself in the midst of your land that the Lord your God is giving you to possess. 3 You shall prepare the roads for yourself and divide into three parts the territory of your land that the Lord your God causes you to inherit, so that any manslayer may flee there.


4 This is the instruction for the manslayer who flees there and lives: whoever strikes his neighbor unintentionally, not hating him from before— 5 for example, a man who goes into the forest with his neighbor to cut wood, and his hand swings the axe to fell a tree, and the head slips from the handle and strikes his neighbor so that he dies—he may flee to one of these cities and live, 6 lest the avenger of blood pursue the manslayer while his heart is hot and overtake him, because the way is long, and strike him fatally, though he did not deserve death since he did not hate him from before. 7 Therefore, I command you, saying, “You shall set apart three cities for yourself.”


8 If the Lord your God enlarges your border as He swore to your fathers and gives you all the land that He spoke to give to your fathers— 9 if you keep all this commandment to do it, which I command you today, to love the Lord your God and to walk in His ways always—then you shall add three more cities for yourself besides these three, 10 so that innocent blood may not be shed in the midst of your land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and bloodguilt be upon you.


11 But if a man hates his neighbor and lies in wait for him and rises against him and strikes him fatally so that he dies, and he flees to one of these cities, 12 then the elders of his city shall send and take him from there and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, so that he may die. 13 Your eye shall not pity him, but you shall purge the guilt of innocent blood from Israel, so that it may go well with you.


14 You shall not move your neighbor’s boundary marker, which the men of old set, in your inheritance that you will inherit in the land that the Lord your God is giving you to possess.


15 A single witness shall not stand against a man for any iniquity or for any sin, in any sin that he commits; by the mouth of two witnesses or by the mouth of three witnesses a matter shall be established. 16 If a malicious witness rises against a man to accuse him of wrongdoing, 17 then both men who have the dispute shall stand before the Lord, before the priests and the judges who are in office in those days. 18 The judges shall inquire diligently, and if the witness is a false witness and has testified falsely against his brother, 19 then you shall do to him as he intended to do to his brother. So you shall purge the evil from your midst. 20 Those who remain shall hear and fear and shall not again commit such evil in your midst. 21 Your eye shall not pity: life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.




Chapter 20


1 When you go out to war against your enemies and see horses, chariots, and an army larger than yours, do not be afraid of them, for the Lord your God, who brought you up from the land of Egypt, is with you. 2 When you draw near to the battle, the priest shall approach and speak to the men. 3 He shall say to them, "Hear, O Israel, today you are drawing near to battle against your enemies. Do not let your heart faint. Do not fear or panic or be terrified because of them, 4 for the Lord your God is the one who goes with you to fight for you against your enemies, to give you victory."


5 Then the officers shall speak to the men, saying, "What man is there who has built a new house and has not dedicated it? Let him go back to his house, lest he die in the battle and another man dedicate it. 6 And what man is there who has planted a vineyard and has not enjoyed its fruit? Let him go back to his house, lest he die in the battle and another man enjoy its fruit. 7 And what man is there who has betrothed a wife and has not taken her? Let him go back to his house, lest he die in the battle and another man take her." 8 The officers shall speak further to the men and say, "What man is there who is fearful and fainthearted? Let him go back to his house, lest he make the heart of his brothers faint like his own." 9 When the officers have finished speaking to the men, they shall appoint commanders of the armies to lead the men.


10 When you draw near to a city to fight against it, offer it terms of peace. 11 If it accepts your terms of peace and opens its gates to you, then all the men found in it shall become forced laborers for you and serve you. 12 But if it does not make peace with you and makes war against you, then you shall besiege it. 13 When the Lord your God delivers it into your hand, you shall strike every male in it with the edge of the sword. 14 However, the women, the children, the livestock, and all that is in the city—all its spoil—you shall take as plunder for yourselves. You shall enjoy the spoil of your enemies, which the Lord your God has given you. 15 Thus you shall do to all the cities that are very far from you, which are not cities of the nations here.


16 But in the cities of these nations that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, you shall not leave alive anything that breathes. 17 You shall devote them to complete destruction—the Hittites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites—as the Lord your God has commanded you, 18 so that they may not teach you to do according to all their abominations that they have done for their gods, and so you sin against the Lord your God.


19 When you besiege a city for a long time, making war against it to capture it, you shall not destroy its trees by wielding an axe against them. You may eat from them, but you shall not cut them down. For is the tree of the field a man, that it should be besieged by you? 20 However, the trees that you know are not trees for food, you may destroy and cut down to build siegeworks against the city that makes war with you, until it falls.




Chapter 21


1 If a man is found slain in the land that the Lord your God is giving you to possess, lying in the field, and it is not known who struck him,
2 then your elders and your judges shall go out and measure the distance to the cities that are around the slain man.
3 And the elders of the city that is nearest to the slain man shall take a heifer that has never been worked and has not pulled in a yoke.
4 The elders of that city shall bring the heifer down to a valley with running water, which is neither plowed nor sown, and there they shall break the heifer’s neck in the valley.
5 Then the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come forward, for the Lord your God has chosen them to minister to Him and to bless in the name of the Lord, and by their word every dispute and every assault shall be settled.
6 All the elders of that city nearest to the slain man shall wash their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley,
7 and they shall declare, “Our hands did not shed this blood, nor did our eyes see it done.
8 Accept atonement, O Lord, for Your people Israel, whom You have redeemed, and do not set the guilt of innocent blood in the midst of Your people Israel.” Then the bloodguilt shall be atoned for them.
9 So you shall purge the guilt of innocent blood from your midst, when you do what is right in the sight of the Lord.


10 When you go out to war against your enemies, and the Lord your God gives them into your hand, and you take them captive,
11 and you see among the captives a beautiful woman, and you desire her and would take her as a wife for yourself,
12 then you shall bring her home to your house, and she shall shave her head and trim her nails.
13 She shall remove the clothes of her captivity and remain in your house and mourn her father and her mother for a full month. After that, you may go in to her and be her husband, and she shall be your wife.
14 But if you no longer delight in her, then you shall let her go where she wishes. You shall not sell her for money, nor shall you treat her as a slave, because you have humbled her.


15 If a man has two wives, one loved and the other unloved, and both the loved and the unloved have borne him sons, and if the firstborn son belongs to the unloved,
16 then on the day when he assigns his possessions as an inheritance to his sons, he may not treat the son of the loved as the firstborn in preference to the son of the unloved, who is the firstborn.
17 But he shall acknowledge the firstborn, the son of the unloved, by giving him a double portion of all that he has, for he is the beginning of his strength. The right of the firstborn belongs to him.


18 If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son who will not obey the voice of his father or the voice of his mother, and though they discipline him, he will not listen to them,
19 then his father and his mother shall take hold of him and bring him out to the elders of his city at the gate of that place.
20 They shall say to the elders of his city, “This son of ours is stubborn and rebellious; he will not obey our voice; he is a glutton and a drunkard.”
21 Then all the men of his city shall stone him with stones until he dies. So you shall purge the evil from your midst, and all Israel shall hear and fear.


22 If a man has committed a sin deserving of death, and he is put to death, and you hang him on a tree,
23 his body shall not remain on the tree overnight, but you shall bury him that same day, for a hanged man is cursed by God. You shall not defile your land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.




Chapter 22


1 If you see your brother’s ox or sheep wandering off, don’t ignore it—you must take it back to him.
2 If your brother isn’t nearby, or you don’t know who owns it, take it home with you and keep it until he comes looking for it, then give it back to him.
3 Do the same with his donkey, his clothing, or anything else your brother loses that you find—you can’t just pretend you didn’t see it.
4 If you see your brother’s donkey or ox collapsed on the road, don’t look the other way—help him get it back on its feet.


5 A woman must not wear a man’s clothing, nor a man put on a woman’s garment, because anyone who does this is detestable to the Lord your God.


6 If you come across a bird’s nest along the way, in a tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs and the mother sitting on them, don’t take the mother along with the young.
7 Let the mother go, but you can take the young for yourself—this way it’ll go well with you, and you’ll live a long life.


8 When you build a new house, make a railing around your roof so you don’t bring bloodguilt on your house if someone falls from it.


9 Don’t plant two kinds of seed in your vineyard—otherwise, the whole crop, both what you planted and what the vineyard produces, will be forfeited.
10 Don’t plow with an ox and a donkey yoked together.
11 Don’t wear clothing woven from wool and linen mixed together.


12 Make tassels on the four corners of the cloak you wear.


13 If a man marries a woman, goes to her, and then hates her,
14 and he accuses her of shameful things, spreads a bad name about her, and says, “I married this woman, but when I approached her, I didn’t find her a virgin,”
15 then the girl’s father and mother must take the evidence of her virginity and bring it to the elders at the city gate.
16 The girl’s father will say to the elders, “I gave my daughter to this man as a wife, but he hates her.
17 Now he’s making up accusations, saying, ‘I didn’t find your daughter a virgin.’ But here’s the evidence of my daughter’s virginity.” And they’ll spread out the cloth before the elders of the city.
18 The elders of that city will take the man, punish him,
19 and fine him a hundred shekels of silver, which he’ll pay to the girl’s father because he defamed a virgin of Israel. She’ll remain his wife—he can’t divorce her as long as he lives.
20 But if the accusation is true, and no evidence of the girl’s virginity is found,
21 they’ll bring the girl to the door of her father’s house, and the men of her city will stone her to death with stones, because she did a disgraceful thing in Israel by playing the harlot in her father’s house. So you’ll purge the evil from among you.


22 If a man is found lying with a married woman, both of them must die—the man who lay with her and the woman. So you’ll purge the evil from Israel.


23 If there’s a virgin girl engaged to a man, and another man finds her in the city and lies with her,
24 you’ll bring them both out to the gate of that city and stone them to death with stones—the girl because she didn’t cry out, though she was in the city, and the man because he violated his neighbor’s wife. So you’ll purge the evil from among you.
25 But if the man finds the engaged girl in the countryside, seizes her, and lies with her, then only the man who lay with her must die.
26 Don’t do anything to the girl—she’s not guilty of a crime deserving death. This case is like when a man attacks his neighbor and murders him.
27 Since he found her in the countryside, the engaged girl may have cried out, but there was no one to rescue her.


28 If a man finds a virgin girl who isn’t engaged, seizes her, lies with her, and they’re discovered,
29 the man who lay with her must give the girl’s father fifty shekels of silver, and she’ll become his wife because he violated her. He can’t divorce her as long as he lives.


30 A man must not take his father’s wife or uncover his father’s skirt.




Chapter 23


1 A man whose testicles are crushed or whose penis is cut off shall not enter the assembly of the Lord.
2 A man born of an illegitimate union shall not enter the assembly of the Lord; even to the tenth generation, none of his descendants shall enter the assembly of the Lord.
3 An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter the assembly of the Lord; even to the tenth generation, none of their descendants shall enter the assembly of the Lord, forever,
4 because they did not meet you with bread and water on the way when you came out of Egypt, and because they hired Balaam, son of Beor from Pethor of Mesopotamia, against you to curse you.
5 But the Lord your God would not listen to Balaam; instead, the Lord your God turned the curse into a blessing for you, because the Lord your God loved you.
6 You shall not seek their peace or their prosperity all your days forever.


7 You shall not detest an Edomite, for he is your brother. You shall not detest an Egyptian, because you were a sojourner in his land.
8 The sons of the third generation who are born to them may enter the assembly of the Lord.


9 When you go out as a camp against your enemies, you shall keep yourself from every evil thing.
10 If there is among you a man who is not clean because of a nocturnal emission, he shall go outside the camp; he shall not come inside the camp.
11 But when evening comes, he shall bathe himself in water, and at sunset he may come back into the camp.
12 You shall have a designated place outside the camp where you shall go to relieve yourself.
13 And you shall have a trowel among your equipment, and when you sit down outside, you shall dig with it and turn back and cover your excrement,
14 because the Lord your God walks in the midst of your camp to deliver you and to give your enemies over to you. Therefore, your camp must be holy, so that He does not see anything indecent among you and turn away from you.


15 You shall not hand over to his master a slave who has escaped to you from his master.
16 He shall dwell with you in your midst, in the place that he chooses within one of your towns, wherever it suits him. You shall not oppress him.


17 There shall be no cult prostitute among the daughters of Israel, nor shall there be a cult prostitute among the sons of Israel.
18 You shall not bring the fee of a prostitute or the wages of a male prostitute into the house of the Lord your God for any vow, for both of these are an abomination to the Lord your God.


19 You shall not charge interest to your brother—interest on money, interest on food, interest on anything that is lent for interest.
20 To a foreigner you may charge interest, but to your brother you shall not charge interest, so that the Lord your God may bless you in all that you put your hand to in the land that you are entering to possess.


21 When you make a vow to the Lord your God, you shall not delay to fulfill it, for the Lord your God will surely require it of you, and it would be sin in you.
22 But if you refrain from vowing, it shall not be sin in you.
23 What has gone out of your lips you shall keep and perform, just as you vowed to the Lord your God as a freewill offering, which you have promised with your mouth.


24 When you go into your neighbor’s vineyard, you may eat grapes until you are satisfied, but you shall not put any in your container.
25 When you go into your neighbor’s standing grain, you may pluck the ears with your hand, but you shall not wield a sickle against your neighbor’s standing grain.




Chapter 24


1 If a man marries a woman and then finds something indecent about her, and she no longer pleases him, he may write her a certificate of divorce, hand it to her, and send her out of his house.
2 After she leaves his house, she may go and marry another man.
3 If the second husband also dislikes her and writes her a certificate of divorce, hands it to her, and sends her out of his house—or if he dies—
4 then her first husband, who divorced her, is not allowed to marry her again, since she has been defiled. That would be an abomination before the Lord. You must not bring sin upon the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance.


5 When a man has recently married, he must not be sent to war or have any other duty imposed on him. For one year he is to be free to stay at home and bring happiness to the wife he has married.


6 Do not take a pair of millstones—or even the upper one—as a pledge, for that would be taking a man’s livelihood as a pledge.


7 If a man is caught kidnapping one of his fellow Israelites and treating him as a slave or selling him, that kidnapper must die. You must purge the evil from among you.


8 In cases of a defiling skin disease, be careful to follow exactly the instructions of the Levitical priests, who will teach you what I commanded them.
9 Remember what the Lord your God did to Miriam along the way after you came out of Egypt.


10 When you make a loan of any kind to your neighbor, do not go into his house to get what he is offering as a pledge.
11 Stand outside, and let the man to whom you are making the loan bring the pledge out to you.
12 If he is a poor man, do not keep his pledge overnight.
13 Return his cloak to him by sunset so that he may sleep in it. Then he will bless you, and it will be an act of righteousness before the Lord your God.


14 Do not oppress a hired worker who is poor and needy, whether he is a fellow Israelite or a foreigner residing in one of your towns.
15 Pay him his wages each day before sunset, because he is poor and depends on them. Otherwise, he may cry out to the Lord against you, and you will be guilty of sin.


16 Fathers must not be put to death for their sons, nor sons for their fathers; each man is to die for his own sin.


17 Do not deny justice to a foreigner or an orphan, and do not take a widow’s cloak as a pledge.
18 Remember that you were a slave in Egypt and that the Lord your God redeemed you from there. That is why I command you to do this.


19 When you harvest your field and forget a sheaf there, do not go back to get it. Leave it for the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow, so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hands.
20 When you beat the olives from your trees, do not go over the branches a second time. Leave what remains for the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow.
21 When you gather the grapes of your vineyard, do not go over it again. Leave what remains for the foreigner, the orphan, and the widow.
22 Remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt. That is why I command you to do this.




Chapter 25


1 If there is a dispute between men and they go to court, and the judges decide their case, they shall justify the righteous man and condemn the wicked man.
2 Then it shall be, if the wicked man deserves to be beaten, the judge shall make him lie down and be beaten in his presence with the number of stripes according to his guilt.
3 He may strike him forty times, but no more, lest he strike him with many more stripes than these and your brother be degraded in your eyes.


4 You shall not muzzle an ox while it is treading out the grain.


5 If brothers dwell together and one of them dies and has no son, the wife of the dead man shall not be married outside the family to a strange man. Her husband’s brother shall go in to her and take her as his wife and perform the duty of a husband’s brother to her.
6 And the firstborn whom she bears shall succeed to the name of his dead brother, so that his name will not be blotted out from Israel.
7 But if the man does not desire to take his brother’s wife, then his brother’s wife shall go up to the gate to the elders and say, “My husband’s brother refuses to raise up a name for his brother in Israel; he will not perform the duty of a husband’s brother to me.”
8 Then the elders of his city shall summon him and speak to him. And if he persists and says, “I do not desire to take her,”
9 then his brother’s wife shall come to him in the sight of the elders and pull his sandal off his foot and spit in his face. And she shall declare, “Thus it is done to the man who does not build up his brother’s house.”
10 And in Israel his name shall be called, “The house of him whose sandal was removed.”


11 If two men, a man and his countryman, are struggling together, and the wife of one comes near to deliver her husband from the hand of the one striking him, and puts out her hand and seizes his genitals,
12 then you shall cut off her hand; your eye shall not pity her.


13 You shall not have in your bag differing weights, a large and a small.
14 You shall not have in your house differing measures, a large and a small.
15 You shall have a full and just weight; you shall have a full and just measure, that your days may be prolonged in the land which the Lord your God gives you.
16 For everyone who does these things, everyone who acts unjustly, is an abomination to the Lord your God.


17 Remember what Amalek did to you along the way when you came out from Egypt,
18 how he met you along the way and attacked among you all the stragglers at your rear when you were faint and weary; and he did not fear God.
19 Therefore it shall come about, when the Lord your God has given you rest from all your surrounding enemies in the land which the Lord your God gives you as an inheritance to possess, you shall blot out the memory of Amalek from under heaven; you shall not forget.




Chapter 26


1 "And it shall be, when you enter the land that the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance, and you take possession of it and dwell in it,
2 that you shall take some of the first of all the produce of the ground that you harvest from the land that the Lord your God is giving you, and you shall put it in a basket and go to the place that the Lord your God chooses to make His name dwell there.
3 And you shall go to the priest who is in office in those days and say to him, ‘I declare today to the Lord your God that I have entered the land that the Lord swore to our fathers to give us.’


4 Then the priest shall take the basket from your hand and set it down before the altar of the Lord your God.
5 And you shall declare before the Lord your God: ‘My father was a wandering Aramean, and he went down to Egypt and sojourned there, few in number. But there he became a great, mighty, and numerous nation.
6 And the Egyptians mistreated us, afflicted us, and imposed hard labor upon us.
7 Then we cried out to the Lord, the God of our fathers, and the Lord heard our voice and saw our affliction, our toil, and our oppression.
8 And the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, with great terror, with signs and wonders.
9 And He brought us to this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
10 And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land that You, O Lord, have given me.’


Then you shall set it down before the Lord your God and worship before the Lord your God.
11 And you shall rejoice in all the good that the Lord your God has given to you and to your house—you, the Levite, and the sojourner who is among you.


12 When you finish tithing the tenth of your produce in the third year, the year of the tithe, you shall give it to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within your towns and be satisfied.
13 Then you shall declare before the Lord your God: ‘I have removed from my house the sacred portion, and I have also given it to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all Your commandment that You have commanded me. I have not transgressed or forgotten Your commandments.
14 I have not eaten of it while in mourning, nor have I removed any of it while unclean, nor have I given any of it as a sacrifice to the dead. I have obeyed the voice of the Lord my God; I have done according to all that You have commanded me.
15 Look down from Your holy dwelling place, from heaven, and bless Your people Israel and the land that You have given us, as You swore to our fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.’


16 This day the Lord your God commands you to do these statutes and ordinances; therefore, you shall be careful to do them with all your heart and with all your soul.
17 Today you have declared that the Lord is your God and that you will walk in His ways, keep His statutes, His commandments, and His ordinances, and obey His voice.
18 And today the Lord has declared that you are His treasured people, as He promised you, and that you are to keep all His commandments,
19 so that He may set you high above all the nations He has made, in praise, in fame, and in honor, and that you shall be a holy people to the Lord your God, as He has spoken."




Chapter 27


1 Then Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, “Keep every commandment that I am giving you today.
2 On the day when you cross the Jordan into the land that the Lord your God is giving you, you shall set up large stones for yourself and coat them with plaster.
3 You shall write on them all the words of this law when you have crossed over, so that you may enter the land that the Lord your God is giving you, a land flowing with milk and honey, just as the Lord, the God of your fathers, has promised you.


4 So when you have crossed the Jordan, you shall set up these stones on Mount Ebal, as I am commanding you today, and coat them with plaster.
5 There you shall build an altar to the Lord your God, an altar of stones. You shall not use an iron tool on them.
6 You shall build the altar of the Lord your God with uncut stones, and you shall offer burnt offerings on it to the Lord your God.
7 You shall sacrifice peace offerings and eat there, rejoicing before the Lord your God.
8 You shall write clearly on the stones all the words of this law.”


9 Then Moses and the Levitical priests spoke to all Israel, saying, “Be silent and listen, O Israel! Today you have become the people of the Lord your God.
10 Therefore, you shall obey the voice of the Lord your God and keep His commandments and His statutes that I am commanding you today.”


11 That day, Moses commanded the people, saying,
12 “When you have crossed the Jordan, these shall stand on Mount Gerizim to bless the people: Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin.
13 And these shall stand on Mount Ebal for the curse: Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.


14 Then the Levites shall speak and say to all the men of Israel with a loud voice:


15 ‘Cursed is the man who makes a carved or cast image, an abomination to the Lord, the work of a craftsman’s hands, and sets it up in secret.’ And all the people shall answer and say, ‘Amen.’


16 ‘Cursed is he who dishonors his father or his mother.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


17 ‘Cursed is he who moves his neighbor’s boundary marker.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


18 ‘Cursed is he who leads a blind man astray on the road.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


19 ‘Cursed is he who perverts justice due to foreigners, the fatherless, or widows.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


20 ‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his father’s wife, for he has uncovered his father’s bed.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


21 ‘Cursed is he who lies with any animal.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


22 ‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his sister, whether the daughter of his father or the daughter of his mother.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


23 ‘Cursed is he who sleeps with his mother-in-law.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


24 ‘Cursed is he who strikes down his neighbor in secret.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


25 ‘Cursed is he who accepts a bribe to kill an innocent person.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’


26 ‘Cursed is he who does not uphold the words of this law by doing them.’ And all the people shall say, ‘Amen.’




Chapter 28


1 And it shall come to pass, if you diligently obey the voice of the Lord your God, being careful to do all His commandments that I command you today, then the Lord your God will set you high above all the nations of the earth.
2 And all these blessings shall come upon you and overtake you, if you obey the voice of the Lord your God.


3 Blessed shall you be in the city, and blessed shall you be in the field.


4 Blessed shall be the fruit of your womb, the produce of your ground, and the offspring of your livestock—the increase of your herds and the young of your flock.


5 Blessed shall be your basket and your kneading trough.


6 Blessed shall you be when you come in, and blessed shall you be when you go out.


7 The Lord will cause your enemies who rise against you to be defeated before you. They shall come out against you one way and flee before you seven ways.
8 The Lord will command the blessing on you in your barns and in all that you undertake, and He will bless you in the land that the Lord your God is giving you.  


9 The Lord will establish you as a holy people to Himself, as He has sworn to you, if you keep the commandments of the Lord your God and walk in His ways.
10 And all the peoples of the earth shall see that you are called by the name of the Lord, and they shall fear you.
11 And the Lord will make you abound in prosperity, in the fruit of your womb, in the offspring of your livestock, and in the produce of your ground, in the land that the Lord swore to your fathers to give you.
12 The Lord will open to you His good treasury, the heavens, to give rain to your land in its season and to bless all the work of your hands. And you shall lend to many nations, but you shall not borrow.
13 And the Lord will make you the head and not the tail, and you shall only go up and not down, if you obey the commandments of the Lord your God that I command you today, being careful to do them.
14 And you shall not turn aside from any of the words that I command you today, to the right or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.  


15 But if you will not obey the voice of the Lord your God, being careful to do all His commandments and His statutes that I command you today, then all these curses shall come upon you and overtake you.


16 Cursed shall you be in the city, and cursed shall you be in the field.


17 Cursed shall be your basket and your kneading trough.


18 Cursed shall be the fruit of your womb, the produce of your ground, the increase of your herds, and the young of your flock.


19 Cursed shall you be when you come in, and cursed shall you be when you go out.


20 The Lord will send on you curses, confusion, and frustration in all that you undertake to do, until you are destroyed and perish quickly because of the evil of your deeds, because you have forsaken Me.
21 The Lord will make the plague cling to you until He has consumed you from the land that you are entering to take possession of it.
22 The Lord will strike you with wasting disease, with fever, with inflammation, with fiery heat, with drought, with blight, and with mildew. They shall pursue you until you perish.
23 And the heavens over your head shall be bronze, and the earth under you shall be iron.
24 The Lord will turn the rain of your land into powder and dust; from heaven it shall come down on you until you are destroyed.
25 The Lord will cause you to be defeated before your enemies. You shall go out one way against them and flee seven ways before them. And you shall be a horror to all the kingdoms of the earth.
26 And your dead body shall be food for all the birds of the air and for the beasts of the earth, and there shall be no one to frighten them away.


27 The Lord will strike you with the boils of Egypt, with tumors, scabs, and itch, from which you cannot be healed.
28 The Lord will strike you with madness, blindness, and confusion of heart.
29 And you shall grope at noonday as the blind grope in darkness, and you shall not prosper in your ways. And you shall be only oppressed and robbed continually, and there shall be no one to save you.


30 You shall betroth a wife, but another man shall lie with her. You shall build a house, but you shall not live in it. You shall plant a vineyard, but you shall not enjoy its fruit.
31 Your ox shall be slaughtered before your eyes, but you shall not eat any of it. Your donkey shall be stolen before you, but it shall not be restored to you. Your sheep shall be given to your enemies, and you shall have no one to save you.
32 Your sons and daughters shall be given to another people, and your eyes shall look on and fail with longing for them all day long, but you shall be helpless.
33 A nation that you do not know shall eat up the fruit of your ground and all your labors, and you shall be only oppressed and crushed continually,
34 so that you are driven mad by the sights that your eyes see.
35 The Lord will strike you on the knees and on the legs with grievous boils of which you cannot be healed, from the sole of your foot to the crown of your head.


36 The Lord will bring you and your king, whom you set over you, to a nation that neither you nor your fathers have known. And there you shall serve other gods of wood and stone.
37 And you shall become a horror, a proverb, and a byword among all the peoples where the Lord will lead you away.


38 You shall carry much seed into the field but shall gather little in, for the locust shall consume it.
39 You shall plant vineyards and dress them, but you shall neither drink of the wine nor gather the grapes, for the worm shall eat them.
40 You shall have olive trees throughout all your territory, but you shall not anoint yourself with the oil, for your olives shall drop off.
41 You shall father sons and daughters, but they shall not be yours, for they shall go into captivity.




Chapter 29


1 These are the words of the covenant that the Lord commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the covenant which He had made with them at Horeb.  


2 And Moses summoned all Israel and said to them, “You have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to all his land,
3 the great trials which your eyes saw, those great signs and wonders.
4 Yet to this day, the Lord has not given you a heart to understand, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear.  


5 And I have led you forty years in the wilderness; your clothes have not worn out upon you, and your sandals have not worn out on your feet.
6 You have not eaten bread, nor have you drunk wine or strong drink, so that you might know that I am the Lord your God.  


7 And when you came to this place, Sihon king of Heshbon and Og king of Bashan came out to meet us in battle, and we defeated them.
8 And we took their land and gave it as an inheritance to the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh.  


9 So keep the words of this covenant and do them, so that you may prosper in all that you do.  


10 You stand today, all of you, before the Lord your God: your chiefs, your tribes, your elders, and your officers, all the men of Israel,
11 your little ones, your wives, and the sojourner who is in your camp, from the one who chops your wood to the one who draws your water,
12 so that you may enter into the covenant of the Lord your God and into His oath, which the Lord your God is making with you today,
13 in order that He may establish you as His people and that He may be your God, as He promised you and as He swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.  


14 Now, it is not with you alone that I am making this covenant and this oath,
15 but with those who stand here with us today before the Lord our God, and also with those who are not here with us today.  


16 For you know how we lived in the land of Egypt and how we passed through the midst of the nations through which you passed.
17 And you saw their detestable things and their idols of wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them.  


18 Beware lest there be among you a man or a woman or a family or a tribe whose heart turns away today from the Lord our God to go and serve the gods of those nations; lest there be among you a root bearing poison and wormwood.
19 And it will be, when he hears the words of this oath, that he blesses himself in his heart, saying, ‘I will have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart,’ so that the watered land may be swept away along with the dry.  


20 The Lord will not be willing to forgive him, but rather, the anger of the Lord and His jealousy will burn against that man, and every curse that is written in this book will rest upon him, and the Lord will blot out his name from under heaven.
21 And the Lord will single him out for disaster from all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this Book of the Law.  


22 And the coming generation, your sons who rise up after you, and the foreigner who comes from a distant land, will see the plagues of that land and the diseases with which the Lord has struck it.
23 The whole land will be a burning waste of brimstone and salt, without being sown, without sprouting, and without any vegetation growing in it, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which the Lord overthrew in His anger and in His wrath.  


24 And all the nations will say, ‘Why has the Lord made the land like this? What caused this great burning of anger?’
25 Then they will say, ‘Because they forsook the covenant of the Lord, the God of their fathers, which He made with them when He brought them out of the land of Egypt,
26 and they went and served other gods and bowed down to them—gods whom they had not known and whom He had not asked them to serve.
27 Therefore, the anger of the Lord burned against this land, to bring upon it every curse that is written in this book.
28 And the Lord uprooted them from their land in anger and wrath and great fury, and He cast them into another land, as it is this day.’  


29 The secret things belong to the Lord our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our sons forever, that we may do all the words of this Law.”




Chapter 30


1 When all these things come upon you—the blessing and the curse that I have set before you—and you call them to mind among all the nations where the Lord your God has driven you,
2 and you return to the Lord your God and obey His voice with all your heart and all your soul, according to all that I command you today, you and your sons,
3 then the Lord your God will restore your fortunes and have compassion on you. He will gather you again from all the peoples where He scattered you.
4 Even if you are driven to the ends of the heavens, the Lord your God will gather you from there, and He will bring you back from there.
5 The Lord your God will bring you into the land that your fathers possessed, and you will take possession of it. He will prosper you and multiply you more than your fathers.


6 The Lord your God will circumcise your heart and the heart of your children, so that you will love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul, that you may live.
7 The Lord your God will put all these curses upon your enemies and upon those who hate you and persecuted you.
8 And you shall return and obey the voice of the Lord and do all His commandments that I command you today.
9 The Lord your God will make you abundantly prosperous in all the work of your hand, in the fruit of your womb, in the fruit of your cattle, and in the fruit of your land. For the Lord will again delight in prospering you, as He delighted in your fathers,
10 if you obey the voice of the Lord your God, to keep His commandments and His statutes that are written in this Book of the Law, and if you turn to the Lord your God with all your heart and all your soul.  


11 For this commandment that I command you today is not too difficult for you, nor is it beyond your reach.
12 It is not in heaven, that you should say, “Who will ascend into heaven for us and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?”
13 Nor is it beyond the sea, that you should say, “Who will cross the sea for us and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it?”
14 But the word is very near you, in your mouth and in your heart, so that you may do it.  


15 See, I have set before you today life and good, death and evil.
16 If you obey the commandments of the Lord your God that I command you today, by loving the Lord your God, by walking in His ways, and by keeping His commandments, His statutes, and His judgments, then you shall live and multiply, and the Lord your God will bless you in the land that you are entering to possess.
17 But if your heart turns away and you do not listen, but are drawn away to worship other gods and serve them,
18 I declare to you today that you shall surely perish. You shall not live long in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to enter and possess.  


19 I call heaven and earth as witnesses against you today, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and curse. Therefore, choose life, so that you and your children may live,
20 by loving the Lord your God, by obeying His voice, and by holding fast to Him. For He is your life and the length of your days, that you may dwell in the land that the Lord swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.




Chapter 31


1 Then Moses went and spoke these words to all Israel.
2 He said to them, “I am now 120 years old; I can no longer go out and come in, and the Lord has told me, ‘You shall not cross over this Jordan.’
3 The Lord your God Himself will cross over before you. He will destroy these nations before you, and you shall dispossess them. Joshua will cross over before you, just as the Lord has said.
4 And the Lord will do to them as He did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land, when He destroyed them.
5 The Lord will give them over to you, and you shall do to them according to the whole commandment that I have commanded you.
6 Be strong and courageous; do not be afraid or tremble before them, for the Lord your God is the One who goes with you. He will not leave you or forsake you.”  


7 Then Moses called Joshua and said to him in the sight of all Israel, “Be strong and courageous, for you shall go with this people into the land that the Lord swore to their fathers to give them, and you shall cause them to inherit it.
8 The Lord Himself goes before you; He will be with you. He will not leave you or forsake you. Do not be afraid or dismayed.”  


9 Then Moses wrote this law and gave it to the priests, the sons of Levi, who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and to all the elders of Israel.
10 And Moses commanded them, saying, “At the end of every seven years, at the appointed time of the year of release, during the Feast of Booths,
11 when all Israel comes to appear before the Lord your God at the place that He will choose, you shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
12 Assemble the people—the men, the women, the children, and the sojourner within your gates—so that they may hear and learn to fear the Lord your God and carefully observe all the words of this law.
13 And their children, who do not know it, shall hear and learn to fear the Lord your God as long as you live in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess.”  


14 Then the Lord said to Moses, “Behold, the time is approaching for you to die. Call Joshua and present yourselves at the tent of meeting, so that I may commission him.” So Moses and Joshua went and presented themselves at the tent of meeting.
15 Then the Lord appeared at the tent in a pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood at the entrance of the tent.  


16 And the Lord said to Moses, “Behold, you are about to rest with your fathers, and this people will rise and play the harlot by following foreign gods of the land they are entering. They will forsake Me and break My covenant that I made with them.
17 Then My anger will burn against them in that day, and I will forsake them and hide My face from them. They will be consumed, and many evils and troubles will come upon them, so that they will say in that day, ‘Have not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?’
18 But I will surely hide My face in that day because of all the evil that they have done by turning to other gods.  


19 Now therefore, write down this song and teach it to the sons of Israel; put it in their mouths, so that this song may be a witness for Me against the sons of Israel.
20 For when I bring them into the land flowing with milk and honey, which I swore to their fathers, and they eat and are satisfied and grow fat, then they will turn to other gods and serve them, and they will despise Me and break My covenant.
21 Then when many evils and troubles come upon them, this song will testify against them as a witness, for it will not be forgotten from the mouths of their descendants. For I know what they are inclined to do even now, before I bring them into the land that I swore to give them.”
22 So that day, Moses wrote down this song, and taught it to the sons of Israel.  


23 Then the Lord commissioned Joshua, the son of Nun, and said, “Be strong and courageous, for you shall bring the sons of Israel into the land that I swore to them, and I will be with you.”  


24 When Moses finished writing the words of this law in a book, until they were complete,
25 he commanded the Levites who carried the ark of the covenant of the Lord, saying,
26 “Take this book of the law and place it beside the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, so that it may be there as a witness against you.
27 For I know your rebellion and your stiff neck. Behold, even while I am still alive with you today, you have been rebellious against the Lord; how much more after my death!
28 Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes and your officers, so that I may speak these words in their hearing and call heaven and earth to witness against them.
29 For I know that after my death you will surely act corruptly and turn aside from the way that I have commanded you. And in the days to come, evil will befall you because you will do what is evil in the sight of the Lord, provoking Him to anger with the work of your hands.”  


30 Then Moses spoke in the hearing of all the assembly of Israel the words of this song, until they were complete.




Chapter 32


1 Give ear, O heavens, and I will speak;  
    let the earth hear the words of my mouth.  
2 May my teaching drop as the rain,  
    my speech distill as the dew,  
like gentle rain upon the tender grass,  
    and like showers upon the herb.  
3 For I will proclaim the name of the Lord;  
    ascribe greatness to our God!  


4 The Rock, his work is perfect,  
    for all his ways are just.  
A God of faithfulness and without iniquity,  
    righteous and upright is he.  
5 They have dealt corruptly with him;  
    they are no longer his children because of their blemish;  
    they are a crooked and twisted generation.  
6 Do you thus repay the Lord,  
    O foolish and unwise people?  
Is he not your father who created you,  
    who made you and established you?  


7 Remember the days of old;  
    consider the years of many generations.  
Ask your father, and he will show you,  
    your elders, and they will tell you.  
8 When the Most High gave the nations their inheritance,  
    when he divided mankind,  
he fixed the boundaries of the peoples  
    according to the number of the sons of God.  
9 But the Lord’s portion is his people,  
    Jacob his allotted inheritance.  


10 He found him in a desert land,  
    in the howling waste of the wilderness;  
he encircled him, he cared for him,  
    he kept him as the apple of his eye.  
11 Like an eagle that stirs up its nest,  
    that flutters over its young,  
spreading out its wings, catching them,  
    bearing them on its pinions,  
12 the Lord alone guided him,  
    and no foreign god was with him.  
13 He made him ride on the high places of the land,  
    and he ate the produce of the field,  
and he suckled him with honey from the rock,  
    and oil from the flinty stone,  
14 curds from the herd, and milk from the flock,  
    with fat of lambs,  
rams of Bashan and goats,  
    with the finest of the wheat—  
    and you drank wine, the blood of the grape.  


15 But Jeshurun grew fat and kicked;  
    you grew fat, stout, and sleek;  
then he forsook God who made him  
    and scoffed at the Rock of his salvation.  
16 They made him jealous with strange gods;  
    with abominations they provoked him to anger.  
17 They sacrificed to demons that were no gods,  
    to gods they had never known,  
to new gods that had come recently,  
    whom your fathers had never feared.  
18 You were unmindful of the Rock that bore you,  
    and you forgot the God who gave you birth.  


19 The Lord saw it and spurned them,  
    because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters.  
20 And he said, “I will hide my face from them;  
    I will see what their end will be,  
for they are a perverse generation,  
    children in whom there is no faithfulness.  
21 They have made me jealous with what is no god;  
    they have provoked me to anger with their idols.  
So I will make them jealous with those who are no people;  
    I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.  
22 For a fire is kindled by my anger,  
    and it burns to the depths of the grave,  
devours the earth and its increase,  
    and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains.  


23 And I will heap disasters upon them;  
    I will spend my arrows on them.  
24 They shall be wasted with hunger,  
    devoured by plague and poisonous pestilence;  
I will send the teeth of beasts against them,  
    with the venom of things that crawl in the dust.  
25 Outside the sword shall bereave,  
    and inside terror,  
for young man and virgin alike,  
    the nursing child with the man of gray hairs.  


26 I would have said, ‘I will cut them to pieces;  
    I will wipe them from human memory,’  
27 had I not feared provocation by the enemy,  
    lest their adversaries should misunderstand,  
lest they should say, ‘Our hand is triumphant,  
    it was not the Lord who did all this.’  


28 For they are a nation void of counsel,  
    and there is no understanding in them.  
29 If they were wise, they would understand this;  
    they would discern their latter end!  
30 How could one chase a thousand,  
    and two put ten thousand to flight,  
unless their Rock had sold them,  
    and the Lord had given them up?  
31 For their rock is not as our Rock;  
    our enemies are by themselves.  


32 For their vine comes from the vine of Sodom  
    and from the fields of Gomorrah;  
their grapes are grapes of poison;  
    their clusters are bitter.  
33 Their wine is the poison of serpents  
    and the cruel venom of asps.  


34 Is not this laid up in store with me,  
    sealed up in my treasuries?  
35 Vengeance is mine, and recompense,  
    for the time when their foot shall slip;  
for the day of their calamity is at hand,  
    and their doom comes swiftly.  


36 For the Lord will vindicate his people  
    and have compassion on his servants,  
when he sees that their power is gone  
    and there is none remaining, bond or free.  
37 Then he will say, ‘Where are their gods,  
    the rock in which they took refuge,  
38 who ate the fat of their sacrifices  
    and drank the wine of their drink offering?  
Let them rise up and help you;  
    let them be your protection!  


39 See now that I, I am he,  
    and there is no god besides me;  
I kill and I make alive;  
    I wound and I heal,  
    and there is none who can deliver out of my hand.  
40 For I lift up my hand to heaven  
    and swear, As I live forever,  
41 if I sharpen my flashing sword,  
    and my hand takes hold on judgment,  
I will take vengeance on my adversaries  
    and will repay those who hate me.  
42 I will make my arrows drunk with blood,  
    and my sword shall devour flesh—  
with the blood of the slain and the captives,  
    from the long-haired heads of the enemy.’  


43 Rejoice, O nations, with his people,  
    for he will avenge the blood of his servants,  
he will take vengeance on his adversaries,  
    and he will atone for his land and his people.”  


44 Moses came and recited all the words of this song in the hearing of the people, he and Joshua the son of Nun.
45 And when Moses had finished speaking all these words to all Israel,
46 he said to them, “Set your heart on all the words that I testify among you today, that you may command your sons to be careful to do all the words of this law.
47 For it is no empty word for you, but your very life, and by this word you shall live long in the land that you are going over the Jordan to possess.”


48 That very day the Lord spoke to Moses,
49 “Go up this mountain of the Abarim, Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, opposite Jericho, and view the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the sons of Israel for a possession.
50 And die on the mountain that you go up, and be gathered to your people, as Aaron your brother died on Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,
51 because you broke faith with me in the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribah-kadesh in the wilderness of Zin,
52 for you shall see the land before you, but you shall not go there, into the land that I am giving to the sons of Israel.”




Chapter 33


1 This is the blessing with which Moses, the man of God, blessed the sons of Israel before his death.  


2 He said, “The Lord came from Sinai and dawned upon them from Seir; He shone forth from Mount Paran, and He came from the midst of myriads of holy ones; at His right hand was a fiery law for them.
3 Indeed, He loves the people; all His holy ones are in Your hand. They followed in Your steps; they receive Your words.
4 Moses commanded us a law, an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob.
5 And He was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people gathered, the tribes of Israel together.


6 “Let Reuben live and not die, nor let his men be few.”


7 This is for Judah, and he said, “Hear, O Lord, the voice of Judah, and bring him to his people. With his hands he contends for them, and You shall be his help against his adversaries.”


8 And of Levi he said, “Your Thummim and Urim belong to Your godly man, whom You tested at Massah, with whom You contended at the waters of Meribah.
9 He said of his father and his mother, ‘I have not regarded them,’ nor did he acknowledge his brothers, nor did he recognize his own sons, for they kept Your word and guarded Your covenant.
10 They shall teach Your judgments to Jacob and Your law to Israel. They shall put incense before You and whole burnt offerings on Your altar.
11 Bless, O Lord, his strength, and accept the work of his hands. Crush the loins of those who rise against him, and those who hate him, so that they may not rise again.”


12 Of Benjamin he said, “The beloved of the Lord shall dwell securely beside Him. He shields him all day long, and he dwells between His shoulders.”


13 And of Joseph he said, “Blessed by the Lord is his land, with the precious things of heaven, with dew, and with the deep waters lying below,
14 with the precious yield of the sun, and the choice produce of the months,
15 with the finest things of the ancient mountains, and the precious things of the everlasting hills,
16 with the precious things of the earth and its fullness, and the favor of Him who dwelt in the bush. Let them rest on the head of Joseph, on the crown of him who was set apart from his brothers.
17 His majesty is like the firstborn of his ox, and his horns are the horns of a wild ox. With them he will gore the peoples, all at once to the ends of the earth. These are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and these are the thousands of Manasseh.”


18 Of Zebulun he said, “Rejoice, Zebulun, in your going out, and Issachar, in your tents.
19 They will call peoples to the mountain; there they will offer righteous sacrifices, for they will draw from the abundance of the seas and the hidden treasures of the sand.”


20 Of Gad he said, “Blessed is the one who enlarges Gad. He dwells as a lion and tears the arm and the crown of the head.
21 He chose the best of the land for himself, for there the ruler’s portion was reserved. He came with the leaders of the people; he carried out the righteousness of the Lord and His judgments for Israel.”


22 Of Dan he said, “Dan is a lion’s cub; he leaps out from Bashan.”


23 Of Naphtali he said, “O Naphtali, satisfied with favor and full of the blessing of the Lord, take possession of the sea and the south.”


24 Of Asher he said, “More blessed than sons is Asher; let him be favored by his brothers, and let him dip his foot in oil.
25 Your bolts will be iron and bronze, and your strength will last as long as your days.
26 There is none like the God of Jeshurun, who rides the heavens to your help, and in His majesty on the clouds.
27 The eternal God is your refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. He drove out the enemy before you and said, ‘Destroy!’”


28 “So Israel dwells securely, alone in a land of grain and new wine, and his heavens drop down dew.
29 Blessed are you, O Israel! Who is like you, a people saved by the Lord? He is the shield of your help and the sword of your majesty! Your enemies shall cower before you, and you shall tread upon their high places.”




Chapter 34


1 Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, which faces Jericho. And the Lord showed him all the land—Gilead as far as Dan,
2 and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah as far as the western sea,
3 and the Negev, and the plain of the valley of Jericho, the city of palm trees, as far as Zoar.
4 And the Lord said to him, “This is the land that I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, ‘I will give it to your descendants.’ I have let you see it with your eyes, but you shall not cross over there.”


5 So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the Lord.
6 And He buried him in the valley in the land of Moab, opposite Beth-peor, but no man knows his burial place to this day.
7 Moses was 120 years old when he died; his eyes were not dim, nor had his strength left him.
8 And the sons of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab for thirty days; then the days of weeping and mourning for Moses came to an end.


9 Now Joshua the son of Nun was filled with the spirit of wisdom, because Moses had laid his hands on him. And the sons of Israel listened to him and did as the Lord had commanded Moses.


10 But no prophet has arisen in Israel like Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
11 in all the signs and wonders that the Lord sent him to do in the land of Egypt—to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land—
12 and in all the mighty power and in all the great terror that Moses displayed in the sight of all Israel.