Ruth


Chapter 1


1 In the days when the judges ruled, there was a famine in the land. A man from Bethlehem in Judah went to live as a foreigner in the territory of Moab, he, his wife, and his two sons. 
2 The man's name was Elimelech, his wife's name was Naomi, and the names of his two sons were Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites from Bethlehem in Judah. They came to the territory of Moab and remained there.


3 Then Elimelech, Naomi’s husband, died, and she was left with her two sons.
4 They took Moabite wives for themselves; the name of one was Orpah, and the name of the other was Ruth. They lived there about ten years.
5 Then both Mahlon and Chilion also died, and the woman was left without her two children and without her husband.


6 She rose up with her daughters-in-law to return from the territory of Moab, because she had heard in the territory of Moab that the Lord had attended to His people by giving them food.
7 So she departed from the place where she had been, and her two daughters-in-law went with her, and they set out on the road back to the land of Judah.


8 Then Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, "Go, return each of you to your mother’s house. May the Lord deal kindly with you, as you have dealt with the dead and with me.
9 May the Lord grant that you may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband." Then she kissed them, and they lifted up their voices and wept.


10 They said to her, "No, we will return with you to your people."


11 But Naomi said, "Turn back, my daughters. Why would you go with me? Do I still have sons in my womb, that they may become your husbands?
12 Turn back, my daughters, go, for I am too old to have a husband. Even if I thought there was hope for me, even if I had a husband tonight and bore sons,
13 would you wait until they were grown? Would you refrain from marrying? No, my daughters, for it is exceedingly bitter to me for your sake that the hand of the Lord has gone out against me."


14 They lifted up their voices and wept again. Then Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clung to her.


15 Naomi said, "Look, your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and to her gods. Return after your sister-in-law."


16 But Ruth said, "Do not urge me to leave you or to turn back from following you. For where you go, I will go, and where you lodge, I will lodge. Your people shall be my people, and your God my God.
17 Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord do so to me, and more also, if anything but death separates me from you."


18 When Naomi saw that she was determined to go with her, she stopped speaking to her about it.
19 So the two of them traveled until they came to Bethlehem. When they came to Bethlehem, the whole town was stirred because of them, and the women said, "Is this Naomi?"


20 She said to them, "Do not call me Naomi; call me Mara, for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.
21 I went away full, but the Lord has brought me back empty. Why call me Naomi, when the Lord has testified against me, and the Almighty has brought calamity upon me?"


22 Thus Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned from the territory of Moab. And they came to Bethlehem at the beginning of the barley harvest.




Chapter 2


1 Now Naomi had a relative on her husband’s side, a man of standing from the clan of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.


2 Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, "Let me go into the field and glean among the ears of grain after someone in whose sight I may find favor." Naomi said to her, "Go, my daughter."
3 So she went out and came to a field and gleaned after the reapers. She happened to come to the portion of the field belonging to Boaz, who was of the clan of Elimelech.


4 Now at that time, Boaz came from Bethlehem and said to the reapers, "May the Lord be with you!" And they answered him, "May the Lord bless you."
5 Then Boaz said to his servant who was in charge of the reapers, "Whose young woman is this?"


6 The servant in charge of the reapers answered, "She is the young Moabite woman who returned with Naomi from the territory of Moab.
7 She said, ‘Please let me glean and gather among the sheaves after the reapers.’ So she came and has continued from morning until now, except for a short rest in the shelter."


8 Then Boaz said to Ruth, "Listen carefully, my daughter. Do not go to glean in another field, nor leave this one, but stay close by my young women.
9 Let your eyes be on the field which they reap, and go after them. Have I not commanded the young men not to touch you? When you are thirsty, go to the water jars and drink from what the young men have drawn."


10 Then she fell on her face, bowing down to the ground, and said to him, "Why have I found favor in your sight, that you should take notice of me, though I am a foreigner?"


11 Boaz answered her, "All that you have done for your mother-in-law after the death of your husband has been fully reported to me, and how you left your father and your mother and the land of your birth, and came to a people you did not know before.
12 May the Lord repay your work, and may your wages be full from the Lord, the God of Israel, under whose wings you have come to seek refuge."


13 Then she said, "May I find favor in your sight, my lord, for you have comforted me and have spoken kindly to your servant, though I am not even like one of your servants."


14 At mealtime Boaz said to her, "Come here, and eat some of the bread and dip your morsel in the vinegar." So she sat beside the reapers, and he passed roasted grain to her, and she ate and was satisfied and had some left over.


15 When she got up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, "Let her glean even among the sheaves, and do not reproach her.
16 Also pull out some grain for her from the bundles and leave it for her to glean, and do not rebuke her."


17 So she gleaned in the field until evening. Then she beat out what she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah of barley.
18 She carried it back to the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. She also took out and gave her what she had left over after she was satisfied.


19 Her mother-in-law said to her, "Where did you glean today? And where did you work? May he who took notice of you be blessed!" So she told her mother-in-law with whom she had worked and said, "The name of the man with whom I worked today is Boaz."


20 Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, "May he be blessed by the Lord, who has not forsaken His kindness to the living and to the dead." Naomi also said to her, "The man is a relative of ours, one of our redeemers."


21 Then Ruth the Moabitess said, "Furthermore, he said to me, ‘You shall stay close to my young men until they have finished all my harvest.’"


22 Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, "It is good, my daughter, that you go out with his young women, so that you do not encounter harm in another field."


23 So she stayed close by the young women of Boaz, gleaning until the end of the barley harvest and the wheat harvest. And she lived with her mother-in-law.




Chapter 3


1 Then Naomi, her mother-in-law, said to her, "My daughter, should I not seek a place of rest for you, that it may be well with you?  
2 Now, is not Boaz, with whose young women you were, our relative? Now, see here, he is winnowing barley tonight at the threshing floor.  
3 Therefore, wash and anoint yourself, put on your cloak, and go down to the threshing floor. But do not make yourself known to the man until he has finished eating and drinking.  
4 And when he lies down, observe the place where he lies. Then go in, uncover his feet, and lie down; and he will tell you what you should do."  
5 And she said to her, "All that you say, I will do."


6 So she went down to the threshing floor and did according to all that her mother-in-law had commanded her.  
7 When Boaz had eaten and drunk and his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. Then she came softly, uncovered his feet, and lay down.  
8 And it happened at midnight that the man trembled and turned over, and noticed a woman was lying at his feet.  
9 And he said, "Who are you?" And she answered, "I am Ruth, your maidservant. Spread your wing over your maidservant, for you are a redeemer."  
10 And he said, "May you be blessed by the LORD, my daughter. You have shown more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, in that you have not gone after young men, whether poor or rich.  
11 And now, my daughter, do not be afraid. All that you say, I will do for you, for all the assembly of my people knows that you are a worthy woman.  
12 And now, it is true that I am a redeemer, yet there is a redeemer nearer than I.  
13 Remain tonight, and in the morning, if he will redeem you, good; let him redeem you. But if he does not desire to redeem you, then I will redeem you, as the LORD lives. Lie down until the morning."


14 So she lay at his feet until the morning, but she arose before one could recognize another. And he said, "Let it not be known that the woman came to the threshing floor."  
15 And he said, "Bring the cloak that is on you and hold it out." So she held it out, and he measured out six measures of barley and laid it on her. Then she went into the city.  
16 And when she came to her mother-in-law, she said, "How did it go, my daughter?" And she told her all that the man had done for her,  
17 and she said, "These six measures of barley he gave me, for he said to me, ‘You must not go back empty to your mother-in-law.’"  
18 Then she said, "Wait, my daughter, until you learn how the matter will fall, for the man will not rest unless he has finished the matter today."




Chapter 4


1 Now Boaz went up to the gate and sat down there. And behold, the redeemer of whom Boaz had spoken was passing by. And Boaz said, “Turn aside, sit down here.” So he turned aside and sat down.
2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city and said, “Sit down here.” And they sat down.


3 Then he said to the redeemer, “Naomi, who has returned from the fields of Moab, is selling the portion of the field that belonged to our brother Elimelech.
4 So I thought I would tell you, saying, ‘Buy it in the presence of those sitting here and in the presence of the elders of my people. If you will redeem it, redeem it; but if you will not redeem it, tell me, that I may know. For there is no one besides you to redeem it, and I am after you.’” And he said, “I will redeem it.”
5 Then Boaz said, “On the day you buy the field from the hand of Naomi, you also acquire Ruth the Moabitess, the widow of the dead man, in order to raise up the name of the dead man over his inheritance.”
6 Then the redeemer said, “I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I ruin my own inheritance. Take my right of redemption for yourself, for I cannot redeem it.”
7 Now this was the custom in former times in Israel concerning redemption and exchange: to confirm every matter, a man would remove his sandal and give it to another; and this was the manner of confirmation in Israel.
8 So the redeemer said to Boaz, “Buy it for yourself,” and he removed his sandal.


9 Then Boaz said to the elders and all the people, “You are witnesses today that I have bought all that belonged to Elimelech and all that belonged to Chilion and Mahlon from the hand of Naomi.
10 Moreover, Ruth the Moabitess, the widow of Mahlon, I have bought to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead man over his inheritance, so that the name of the dead man may not be cut off from among his brothers and from the gate of his place. You are witnesses today.”
11 And all the people who were at the gate and the elders said, “We are witnesses. May the Lord make the woman who is coming into your house like Rachel and Leah, who together built up the house of Israel. May you achieve wealth in Ephrathah and make a name for yourself in Bethlehem.
12 And may your house be like the house of Perez, whom Tamar bore to Judah, through the offspring that the Lord will give you by this young woman.”


13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife, and he went in to her, and the Lord gave her conception, and she bore a son.
14 Then the women said to Naomi, “Blessed be the Lord, who has not left you today without a redeemer, and may his name be renowned in Israel!
15 He shall be to you a restorer of life and a sustainer of your old age; for your daughter-in-law, who loves you and who is better to you than seven sons, has given birth to him.”
16 Then Naomi took the child and laid him in her lap, and she became his nurse.


17 And the women neighbors gave him a name, saying, “A son has been born to Naomi.” And they named him Obed. He was the father of Jesse, the father of David.


18 Now these are the generations of Perez: Perez fathered Hezron,
19 and Hezron fathered Ram, and Ram fathered Amminadab,
20 and Amminadab fathered Nahshon, and Nahshon fathered Salmon,
21 and Salmon fathered Boaz, and Boaz fathered Obed,
22 and Obed fathered Jesse, and Jesse fathered David.