2 Kings


Chapter 1


1 After the death of Ahab, Moab rebelled against Israel.


2 And Ahaziah fell through the lattice in his upper chamber which was in Samaria and lay sick. So he sent messengers and said to them, “Go, inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover from this sickness.”
3 But the angel of the LORD said to Elijah the Tishbite, “Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say to them, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are going to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?’
4 Now therefore, thus says the LORD, ‘You shall not come down from the bed to which you have gone up, but you shall surely die.’” And Elijah departed.


5 When the messengers returned to him, he said to them, “Why have you returned?”
6 And they said to him, “A man came up to meet us and said to us, ‘Go, return to the king who sent you and say to him, Thus says the LORD: 'Is it because there is no God in Israel that you are sending to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you shall not come down from the bed to which you have gone up, but you shall surely die.’”
7 He said to them, “What kind of man was he who came up to meet you and told you these things?”
8 They answered him, “He wore a garment of hair, with a belt of leather around his waist.” And he said, “It is Elijah the Tishbite.”


9 Then the king sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty men. And he went up to him, and they found him sitting on the top of a hill. And he said to him, “O man of God, the king says, ‘Come down.’”
10 But Elijah answered the captain of fifty, “If I am a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty.” Then fire came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty.


11 So the king again sent to him another captain of fifty with his fifty. And he said to him, “O man of God, thus says the king: ‘Come down quickly!’”
12 But Elijah answered them, “If I am a man of God, let fire come down from heaven and consume you and your fifty.” Then the fire of God came down from heaven and consumed him and his fifty.


13 Then the king again sent a third captain of fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up and came and fell on his knees before Elijah and begged him, saying, “O man of God, please let my life and the life of these fifty servants of yours be precious in your sight.
14 I know that fire came down from heaven and consumed the two former captains of fifty with their fifties, but now let my life be precious in your sight.”


15 Then the angel of the LORD said to Elijah, “Go down with him; do not be afraid of him.” So he arose and went down with him to the king.
16 And he said to him, “Thus says the LORD: Why have you sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of His word? Therefore you shall not come down from the bed to which you have gone up, but you shall surely die.”


17 So he died according to the word of the LORD that Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram became king in his place in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, because Ahaziah had no son.
18 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?




Chapter 2


1 And it came to pass, when the LORD was about to take Elijah up to heaven in a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.
2 And Elijah said to Elisha, “Stay here, please, for the LORD has sent me as far as Bethel.” But Elisha said, “As the LORD lives, and while you yourself continue to live, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel.
3 Then the sons of the prophets who were at Bethel came out to Elisha and said to him, “Do you know that today the LORD will take your master from over you?” And he said, “Yes, I know about it; be silent.”


4 Then Elijah said to him, “Elisha, stay here, please, for the LORD has sent me to Jericho.” But he said, “As the LORD lives, and while you yourself continue to live, I will not leave you.” So they continued to Jericho.
5 Then the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho approached Elisha and said to him, “Do you know that today the LORD will take your master from over you?” And he answered, “Yes, I know about it; be silent.”


6 Then Elijah said to him, “Stay here, please, for the LORD has sent me to the Jordan River.” But he said, “As the LORD lives, and while you yourself continue to live, I will not leave you.” So the two of them went on.
7 And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went and stood at a distance from them, while the two of them stood by the Jordan.


8 Then Elijah took his cloak, rolled it up, and struck the water, and the water was divided to the one side and to the other, allowing the two of them to cross over on dry ground.


9 And when they had crossed, Elijah said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you before I am taken from you.” And Elisha said, “Please let there be a double portion of your spirit upon me.”
10 And he said, “You have asked a hard thing. Yet, if you see me when I am taken from you, it shall be so for you; but if not, it shall not be so.”


11 Then it happened that as they were walking along and talking, that a chariot of fire and horses of fire separated the two of them, and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.
12 And Elisha saw it and cried out, “My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and its horsemen!” And he saw him no more. Then he took hold of his own clothes and tore them in two pieces.


13 And he picked up the cloak of Elijah that had fallen from him and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan.
14 Then he took the cloak of Elijah that had fallen from him and struck the water, saying, “Where is the LORD, the God of Elijah?” And when he had struck the water, it was divided to the one side and to the other, and Elisha crossed over.


15 When the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho, watching from a distance, saw him, they said, “The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.” And they came to meet him and bowed to the ground before him.
16 And they said to him, “See now, how among your servants there are fifty strong men. Please let them go and search for your master, perhaps the Spirit of the LORD has lifted him up and cast him on some mountain or into some valley.” But he said, “You shall not send.”
17 But when they urged him until he was ashamed, he said, “Send.” So they sent fifty men, and they searched for three days but did not find him.
18 And they returned to him, while he stayed at Jericho. And he said to them, “Didn't I tell you, ‘Don't go’?”


19 Then the men of the city said to Elisha, “Look at the situation of this city, it is good, as my lord sees, but the spring of water is bad, causing the land to be unfruitful.”
20 And he said, “Bring me a new bowl, and put salt in it.” So they brought it to him.
21 Then he went out to the spring of water and threw salt in it and said, “Thus says the LORD: I have healed this water. No longer shall there be death or unfruitfulness from it.”
22 So the water has been healed to this day, according to the word that Elisha spoke.


23 Then he went up from there to Bethel. And as he was going up along the way, some small boys came out of the city and mocked him and said to him, “Go up, you baldhead! Go up, you baldhead!”
24 And he turned around and looked at them, and he cursed them in the name of the LORD. Then two female bears came out of the woods and tore forty-two of the boys.
25 And he went from there to Mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Samaria.




Chapter 3


1 Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigned twelve years.
2 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, but not like his father and mother, for he removed the pillar of Baal that his father had made.
3 Nevertheless, he clung to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin; he did not depart from them.


4 Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep breeder, and he used to pay the king of Israel one hundred thousand lambs and the wool of one hundred thousand rams.
5 But when Ahab died, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
6 So King Jehoram marched out of Samaria at that time and mustered all Israel.
7 And he went and sent word to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, saying, “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you go with me to battle against Moab?” And he said, “I will go. I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses.”
8 Then he said, “By which way shall we go up?” And he answered, “By way of the wilderness of Edom.”


9 So the king of Israel went with the king of Judah and the king of Edom. And when they had made a circuit of seven days’ journey, there was no water for the army or for the animals that followed them.
10 Then the king of Israel said, “Alas! The LORD has called these three kings to give them into the hand of Moab.”
11 But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there not here a prophet of the LORD, through whom we may inquire of the LORD?” Then one of the servants of the king of Israel answered, “Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who used to pour water on the hands of Elijah.”
12 And Jehoshaphat said, “The word of the LORD is with him.” So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.


13 Then Elisha said to the king of Israel, “What have I to do with you? Go to the prophets of your father and to the prophets of your mother.” But the king of Israel said to him, “No, for the LORD has called these three kings to give them into the hand of Moab.”
14 And Elisha said, “As the LORD of hosts lives, before whom I stand, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, I would neither look at you nor talk to you.
15 However, bring me a musician.” And when the musician played, the hand of the LORD came upon him.
16 And he said, “Thus says the LORD: I will make this dry streambed full of pools.
17 For thus says the LORD: You shall not see wind or rain, yet that streambed shall be filled with water, so that you shall drink, you, your livestock, and your animals.
18 This is but a light thing in the sight of the LORD. He will also give the Moabites into your hand,
19 and you shall strike every fortified city and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree and stop up all the springs of water and ruin every good piece of land with stones.”


20 The next morning, about the time of the offering of the sacrifice, they saw water came from the direction of Edom, till the country was filled with water.


21 When all the Moabites heard that the kings had come up to fight against them, all who were able to bear arms and older were called up, and they stood on the border.
22 And when they rose early in the morning, the sun shone on the water, and the Moabites saw the water opposite them as red as blood.
23 And they said, “This is blood! The kings have surely fought together and struck one another down. Now then, Moab, to the spoil!”
24 But when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose and struck the Moabites, so that they fled before them. And they went forward, striking the Moabites as they went.
25 And they overthrew the cities, and on every good piece of land each man threw a stone until it was covered. They stopped every spring of water and felled all the good trees, until only its stones were left in Kir-hareseth, and the slingers surrounded it and attacked it.


26 When the king of Moab saw that the battle was too fierce for him, he took with him seven hundred swordsmen to break through to the king of Edom, but they could not.
27 Then he took his firstborn son who was to reign in his place and offered him as a burnt offering on the wall. And there came great wrath against Israel, and they withdrew from him and returned to their own land.




Chapter 4


1 Now a certain woman, who was the wife of one of the sons of the prophets, cried out to Elisha, saying, “Your servant my husband is dead, and you know that your servant feared the LORD. But the creditor has come to take my two sons to be his slaves.”
2 And Elisha said to her, “What shall I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” And she said, “Your servant has nothing in the house except a jar of oil.”
3 Then he said, “Go outside, borrow vessels from all your neighbors, empty vessels—and not just a few.
4 Then go in and shut the door behind you and your sons, and pour into all these vessels. And when one jar is full, set it aside.”
5 So she went from him and shut the door behind herself and her sons. They brought the vessels to her, and she poured.
6 When the vessels were full, she said to her son, “Bring me another vessel.” But he said to her, “There are no more.” Then the oil stopped flowing.
7 She came and told the man of God, and he said, “Go, sell the oil and pay your debt, and you and your sons can live on the rest.”


8 Now there came a day when Elisha passed through Shunem, where there was a prominent woman, and she urged him to eat some food. So whenever he passed that way, he turned in there to eat.
9 And she said to her husband, “Listen, I know that this is a holy man of God who continually passes our way.
10 Let us make a little upper room on the wall and put a bed for him there, and a table, a chair, and a lamp, so that whenever he comes to us, he can stay there.”


11 One day he came there, and he turned into the upper room and lay down there.
12 And he said to Gehazi his servant, “Call this Shunammite.” When he had called her, she stood before him.
13 And he said to him, “Say now to her, ‘Since you have taken all this trouble for us. What can be done for you? Would you like to be spoken for to the king or to the commander of the army?’” But she answered, “I dwell among my own people.”
14 And he said, “Then what is to be done for her?” Gehazi answered, “I noticed that she has no son, and her husband is old.”
15 So he said, “Call her.” When he had called her, she stood in the doorway.
16 And he said, “At this time next year, you shall embrace a son.” And she said, “No, my lord, O man of God, do not lie to your servant.”
17 But the woman conceived and bore a son at that season the next year, as Elisha had told her.


18 When the child was grown, one day he went out to his father among the reapers.
19 And he said to his father, “My head, my head!” So he said to a servant, “Carry him to his mother.”
20 When he had lifted him and brought him to his mother, the child sat on her knees until noon, and then he died.
21 And she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door behind him and went out.
22 Then she called to her husband and said, “Send me one of the servants and one of the donkeys, so I can hurry to the man of God and return.”
23 He said, “Why will you go to him today? It is neither a new moon nor a Sabbath.” She said, “Let me go in Peace.”


24 Then she saddled the donkey and said to her servant, “Drive and go forward; do not slow down the pace for me unless I tell you.”
25 So she went and came to the man of God at Mount Carmel. When the man of God saw her from a distance, he said to Gehazi, his servant, “Look, that is the Shunammite woman.
26 Run now to meet her and say to her, ‘Is it well with you? Is it well with your husband? Is it well with the child?’” And she answered, “It is well.”
27 When she came to the man of God at the top of the hill, she caught hold of his feet. And Gehazi came near to push her away. But the man of God said, “Leave her alone, for her soul is bitter within her, and the LORD has hidden it from me and has not told me.”
28 Then she said, “Did I ask for a son from my lord? Didn't I say, ‘Do not deceive me?’”


29 Then he said to Gehazi, “Put on your cloak, take my staff in your hand, and go. If you meet anyone, do not greet him, and if anyone greets you, do not answer him. But lay my staff on the face of the child.”
30 But the mother of the child said, “As the LORD lives and you yourself live, I will not leave you.” So he arose and followed her.
31 Gehazi went on ahead and laid the staff on the face of the child, but there was neither sound nor response. So he returned to meet him and told him, “The child has not awakened.”


32 When Elisha came into the house, he saw the child lying dead on his bed.
33 So he went in and shut the door behind the two of them and prayed to the LORD.
34 Then he went up and lay on the child, and put his mouth on his mouth, his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands. And he stretched himself upon him, and the flesh of the child became warm.
35 Then he returned and walked once back and forth in the house, and went up and stretched himself upon him. And the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.
36 Then he called Gehazi and said, “Call this Shunammite.” So he called her. And when she came to him, he said, “Here is your son.”
37 Then she came in and fell at his feet, bowing to the ground. Then she picked up her son and went out.


38 And Elisha returned to Gilgal. Now there was a famine in the land, and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him. And he said to his servant, “Set on the large pot and boil stew for the sons of the prophets.”
39 And one went out into the field to gather herbs and found a wild vine and gathered from it a lapful of wild gourds and came and sliced them into the pot of stew, though they did not know what they were.
40 So they poured it out for the men to eat. But as they ate the stew, they cried out, “O man of God, there is death in the pot!” And they could not eat it.
41 Then he said, “Bring flour.” And he threw it into the pot and said, “Pour it out for the men to eat.” And there was no harm in the pot.


42 A man came from Baal-shalishah, bringing the man of God bread of the firstfruits, twenty loaves of barley and fresh ears of grain in his sack. And Elisha said, “Give them to the men, that they may eat.”
43 But his servant said, “How can I set this before a hundred men?” So he repeated, “Give them to the men, that they may eat, for thus says the LORD, ‘They shall eat and have some left.’”
44 So he set it before them, and they ate and had some left, according to the word of the LORD.




Chapter 5


1 Now Naaman, commander of the army of the king of Aram, was a great man in the sight of his master and highly respected, because by him the LORD had given victory to Aram. He was a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper.
2 Now the Arameans had gone out in bands and had taken captive a little girl from the land of Israel, and she served Naaman’s wife.
3 And she said to her mistress, “If only my lord were with the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would cure him of his leprosy.”
4 So Naaman went in and told his master, saying, “Thus and thus spoke the girl who is from the land of Israel.”
5 Then the king of Aram said, “Go now, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” So he went and took with him ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of gold, and ten changes of clothing.
6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, which read, “Now when this letter reaches you, see that I have sent my servant Naaman to you, that you may cure him of his leprosy.”


7 And when the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his clothes and said, “Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends word to me to cure a man of his leprosy? Only consider and see how he is seeking a quarrel with me.”


8 But when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, he sent word to the king, saying, “Why have you torn your clothes? Let him come to me, so that he may know there is a prophet in Israel.”
9 So Naaman came with his horses and his chariot and stood at the doorway of Elisha’s house.
10 And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, “Go and wash in the Jordan River seven times, and your flesh shall be restored, and you shall be clean.”
11 But Naaman became furious and went away, saying, “See here, I said to myself, ‘He will surely come out to me and stand and call on the name of the LORD his God, and wave his hand over the place and cure the leper.’
12 Are not Abanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Could I not wash myself in them and be clean?” So he turned and went away in a rage.


13 Then his servants came near and spoke to him and said, “My father, if the prophet had told you to do something great, would you not have done it? How much more then when he says to you, ‘Wash and be clean’?”
14 So he went down and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the word of the man of God, and his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little boy, and he was clean.


15 Then he returned to the man of God with all his company, and came and stood before him and said, “Now I know that there is no God in all the earth except in Israel. So now, please accept a gift from your servant.”
16 But he said, “As the LORD lives, before whom I stand, I will accept nothing.” And though he urged him to take it, he refused.
17 And Naaman said, “If not, please let your servant be given two mule-loads of earth, for your servant will no longer offer burnt offering or sacrifice to other gods, but to the LORD.
18 In this matter may the LORD pardon your servant: when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, leaning on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon—when I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, may the LORD pardon your servant in this matter.”
19 And he said to him, “Go in peace.” So he departed from him some distance.


20 But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, “My master has spared this Naaman the Aramean by not accepting from his hand what he brought. As the LORD lives, I will run after him and take something from him.”
21 So Gehazi pursued Naaman. When Naaman saw someone running after him, he got down from the chariot to meet him and said, “Is all well?”
22 And he said, “All is well. My master has sent me, saying, ‘Just now two young men of the sons of the prophets have come to me from the hill country of Ephraim. Please give them a talent of silver and two changes of clothing.’”
23 And Naaman said, “Be pleased to take two talents.” And he urged him and tied up two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of clothing, and gave them to two of his servants; and they carried them before him.
24 When he came to the hill, he took them from their hand and deposited them in the house. Then he sent the men away, and they departed.


25 But he went in and stood before his master. And Elisha said to him, “Where have you been, Gehazi?” And he said, “Your servant went nowhere.”
26 Then he said to him, “Did not my heart go when the man turned from his chariot to meet you? Is it a time to take money and to take clothing, olive groves and vineyards, sheep and oxen, male and female servants?
27 Therefore the leprosy of Naaman shall cling to you and to your descendants forever.” So he went out from his presence leprous, as white as snow.




Chapter 6


1 Now the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, “Behold now, the place where we dwell before you is too small for us.
2 Please let us go to the Jordan, and each of us take from there a log, and let us make a place there where we may dwell.” And he said, “Go.”
3 Then one said, “Please be willing to go with your servants.” And he answered, “I will go.”
4 So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan, they cut down trees.
5 But as one was felling a log, the axe head fell into the water. And he cried out and said, “Alas, my master! It was borrowed.”
6 Then the man of God said, “Where did it fall?” And he showed him the place. Then he cut off a stick and threw it in there and made the iron float.
7 And he said, “Take it up.” So he reached out his hand and took it.


8 Now the king of Aram was warring against Israel. And he consulted with his servants, saying, “At such and such a place shall be my camp.”
9 But the man of God sent word to the king of Israel, saying, “Beware that you do not pass this place, for the Arameans are coming down there.”
10 And the king of Israel sent to the place about which the man of God had told him. Thus he warned him, so that he saved himself there more than once or twice.


11 And the heart of the king of Aram was greatly troubled because of this thing, and he called his servants and said to them, “Will you not show me which of us is for the king of Israel?”
12 Then one of his servants said, “No, my lord, O king, but Elisha the prophet who is in Israel tells the king of Israel the words that you speak in your bedroom.”
13 So he said, “Go and see where he is, that I may send and seize him.” And it was told him, saying, “We discovered that he is in Dothan.”
14 So he sent horses and chariots and a great army there. And they came by night and surrounded the city.


15 When the servant of the man of God rose early and went out, behold, an army with horses and chariots was all around the city. And the servant said to him, “Alas, my master! What shall we do?”
16 And he said, “Do not be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.”
17 Then Elisha prayed and said, “O LORD, please open his eyes that he may see.” And the LORD opened the servant’s eyes, and he looked and saw, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha.


18 And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed to the LORD and said, “Strike this people, I pray, with blindness.” And He struck them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.
19 Then Elisha said to them, “This is not the way, and this is not the city. Follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom you seek.” And he led them to Samaria.


20 When they had entered Samaria, Elisha said, “O LORD, open the eyes of these men, that they may see.” And the LORD opened their eyes, and they looked and saw that they were in the midst of Samaria.
21 Then the king of Israel, when he saw them, said to Elisha, “Shall I kill them, shall I kill them, my father?”
22 But he said, “You shall not kill them. Would you kill those you have taken captive with your sword and your bow? Set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink and go to their master.”
23 So he prepared a great feast for them, and when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. And the Aramean raiders came no more into the land of Israel.


24 Now after this, it happened that Ben-hadad king of Aram gathered all his army and went up and besieged Samaria.
25 And there was a great famine in Samaria, and they besieged it, until a donkey’s head was sold for eighty shekels of silver, and the fourth part of a kab of dove’s dung for five shekels of silver.
26 And as the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried out to him, saying, “Help, my lord the king!”
27 And he said, “If the LORD does not help you, from where shall I help you? From the threshing floor or from the winepress?”
28 And the king said to her, “What is your trouble?” And she answered, “This woman said to me, ‘Give your son that we may eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.’
29 So we boiled my son and ate him. And I said to her on the next day, ‘Give your son, that we may eat him,’ but she has hidden her son.”


30 When the king heard the words of the woman, he tore his clothes. Now he was passing by on the wall, and the people looked, and saw that he had sackcloth beneath on his body.
31 Then he said, “May God do so to me and more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat remains on him today.”


32 Now Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. And the king sent a man from before him, but before the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, “Do you see how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door and hold it fast against him. Is not the sound of his master’s feet behind him?”
33 While he was still talking with them, behold, the messenger came down to him, and he said, “This trouble is from the LORD. Why should I wait for the LORD any longer?”




Chapter 7


1 Then Elisha said, “Hear the word of the LORD. Thus says the LORD: Tomorrow about this time a seah of fine flour shall be sold for a shekel, and two seahs of barley for a shekel, at the gate of Samaria.”
2 Then the captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God and said, “If the LORD should make windows in heaven, could this thing be?” But he said, “You shall see it with your eyes, but you shall not eat of it.”


3 Now there were four leprous men at the entrance of the gate, and they said to one another, “Why are we sitting here until we die?
4 If we say, ‘Let us enter the city,’ the famine is in the city, and we shall die there. And if we sit here, we also die. Now then, come, let us go over to the camp of the Arameans. If they spare our lives, we shall live, and if they kill us, we shall but die.”
5 So they arose at twilight to go to the camp of the Arameans. But when they came to the outskirts of the camp of the Arameans, they saw that there was no one there.


6 For the LORD had caused the army of the Arameans to hear the sound of chariots and the sound of horses, the sound of a great army, so that they said to one another, “The king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Egypt to come against us.”
7 So they fled away in the twilight and abandoned their tents, their horses, and their donkeys, leaving the camp as it was, and fled for their lives.
8 And when these lepers came to the edge of the camp, they went into a tent and ate and drank, and carried away silver, gold, and clothing, and went and hid them. Then they returned and entered another tent and carried things from there also, and went and hid them.


9 Then they said to one another, “We are not doing right. This day is a day of good news. If we are silent and wait until the morning light, punishment will overtake us. Now therefore come, let us go and tell the king’s household.”
10 So they came and called to the gatekeepers of the city and told them, “We went to the camp of the Arameans, and found that there was no one to be seen or heard there—nothing but the horses tied and the donkeys tied, and the tents as they were.”
11 Then the gatekeepers called out, and it was told within the king’s household.


12 And the king arose in the night and said to his servants, “I will tell you what the Arameans have done to us. They know that we are hungry. Therefore they have gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the open country, thinking, ‘When they come out of the city, we shall capture them alive and get into the city.’”
13 Then one of his servants answered, “Let some men take five of the remaining horses—since those who are left here will fare like all the multitude of Israel who have already perished—let us send and see.”
14 So they took two horsemen, and the king sent them after the army of the Arameans, saying, “Go and see.”


15 So they went after them as far as the Jordan, and saw that all the road was littered with garments and equipment that the Arameans had thrown away in their haste. And the messengers returned and told the king.
16 Then the people went out and plundered the camp of the Arameans. So a seah of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two seahs of barley for a shekel, according to the word of the LORD.


17 Now the king had appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have charge of the gate, and the people trampled him in the gate, and he died, as the man of God had said when the king came down to him.
18 For when the man of God had said to the king, “Two seahs of barley shall be sold for a shekel, and a seah of fine flour for a shekel, tomorrow about this time at the gate of Samaria,”
19 the captain had answered the man of God, “If the LORD should make windows in heaven, could such a thing be?” And he had said, “You shall see it with your eyes, but you shall not eat of it.”
20 So it happened to him, for the people trampled him in the gate, and he died.




Chapter 8


1 Now Elisha had said to the woman whose son he had restored to life, “Arise and go, you and your household, and sojourn wherever you can sojourn, for the LORD has called for a famine, and it will also come upon the land for seven years.”
2 So the woman arose and did according to the word of the man of God. She and her household went and sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.
3 And it came to pass at the end of the seven years that the woman returned from the land of the Philistines, and she went out to appeal to the king for her house and her field.
4 Now the king was speaking with Gehazi, the servant of the man of God, saying, “Please relate to me all the great things that Elisha has done.”
5 And as he was telling the king how he had restored the dead to life, the woman whose son he had restored to life came to appeal to the king for her house and her field. And Gehazi said, “My lord the king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.”
6 When the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed an officer for her, saying, “Restore all that was hers, and all the produce of the field from the day she left the land until now.”


7 Then Elisha came to Damascus. Now Ben-hadad king of Aram was sick, and it was told him, saying, “The man of God has come here.”
8 So the king said to Hazael, “Take a gift in your hand and go to meet the man of God, and inquire of the LORD by him, saying, ‘Shall I recover from this sickness?’”
9 So Hazael went to meet him and took a gift in his hand, even every good thing of Damascus, forty camel loads, and came and stood before him and said, “Your son Ben-hadad king of Aram has sent me to you, saying, ‘Shall I recover from this sickness?’”
10 And Elisha said to him, “Go, say to him, ‘You shall surely recover,’ but the LORD has shown me that he shall surely die.”
11 And he fixed his gaze and stared at him until he was ashamed, and the man of God wept.
12 And Hazael said, “Why does my lord weep?” And he answered, “Because I know the evil that you will do to the sons of Israel: you will set their strongholds on fire, and kill their young men with the sword, and dash their little ones in pieces, and rip open their pregnant women.”
13 Then Hazael said, “But what is your servant, who is but a dog, that he should do this great thing?” And Elisha answered, “The LORD has shown me that you shall be king over Aram.”
14 So he departed from Elisha and came to his master, who said to him, “What did Elisha say to you?” And he answered, “He told me that you would surely recover.”
15 But on the next day, he took the cover and dipped it in water and spread it on his face so that he died. And Hazael became king in his place.


16 Now in the fifth year of Joram son of Ahab king of Israel, when Jehoshaphat was king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
17 He was thirty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
18 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, just as the house of Ahab had done, for the daughter of Ahab was his wife. And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD.
19 Yet the LORD was not willing to destroy Judah, for the sake of David his servant, since He promised him to give a lamp to him and to his sons forever.


20 In his days Edom revolted from the rule of Judah and set up a king over themselves.
21 So Joram crossed over to Zair with all his chariots, and it happened that he rose by night and struck the Edomites who had surrounded him and the captains of the chariots. But his army fled to their tents.
22 So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.


23 Now the rest of the acts of Joram and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
24 So Joram slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Ahaziah his son became king in his place.


25 In the twelfth year of Joram son of Ahab king of Israel, Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign.
26 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother’s name was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri king of Israel.
27 And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab and did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, as the house of Ahab had done, for he was related by marriage to the house of Ahab.


28 And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead, and the Arameans wounded Joram.
29 So King Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Arameans had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. Then Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.




Chapter 9


1 Then Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets and said to him, “Gird up your loins, and take this flask of oil in your hand, and go to Ramoth-gilead.
2 When you arrive there, look for Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat, the son of Nimshi. Go in and make him rise from among his brothers, and take him into an inner room.
3 Then take the flask of oil and pour it on his head and say, ‘Thus says the LORD: I anoint you king over Israel.’ Then open the door and flee, and do not delay.”


4 So the young man, the servant of the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead.
5 And when he arrived, he saw the commanders of the army sitting there. And he said, “I have a message for you, O commander.” And Jehu said, “For which one of us?” And he said, “For you, O commander.”
6 Then he arose and went into the house, and he poured the oil on his head and said to him, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: I anoint you king over the people of the LORD, over Israel.
7 And you shall strike down the house of Ahab your master, that I may avenge the blood of My servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the LORD, at the hand of Jezebel.
8 For the whole house of Ahab shall perish, and I will cut off from Ahab every male, both bond and free in Israel.
9 And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam son of Nebat and like the house of Baasha son of Ahijah.
10 And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the territory of Jezreel, and none shall bury her.” Then he opened the door and fled.


11 Then Jehu came out to the servants of his master, and one said to him, “Is all well? Why did this madman come to you?” And he said to them, “You know the man and his talk.”
12 But they said, “It is not true; tell us now.” And he said, “Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: I anoint you king over Israel.’”
13 Then they hurried and took their cloaks and laid them under him on the bare steps, and they blew the trumpet and said, “Jehu is king!”


14 So Jehu, son of Jehoshaphat, son of Nimshi, conspired against Joram. (Now Joram had been keeping watch at Ramoth-gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Aram.
15 But King Joram had returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds that the Arameans had inflicted on him when he fought with Hazael, king of Aram.) And Jehu said, “If this is your intention, let no one escape from the city to go tell it in Jezreel.”
16 Then Jehu mounted his chariot and went to Jezreel, for Joram was lying there. And Ahaziah, king of Judah, had come down to see Joram.


17 Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel, and he saw the company of Jehu as he came, and said, “I see a company.” And Joram said, “Take a horseman and send to meet them, and let him say, ‘Is it peace?’”
18 So a horseman went to meet him and said, “Thus says the king, ‘Is it peace?’” And Jehu said, “What have you to do with peace? Turn and follow me.” And the watchman reported, saying, “The messenger came to them, but he is not returning.”
19 Then he sent out a second horseman, who came to them and said, “Thus says the king, ‘Is it peace?’” And Jehu answered, “What have you to do with peace? Turn and follow me.”
20 And the watchman reported, “He came up to them and is not returning. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu, son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.”


21 Then Joram said, “Make ready.” And they made his chariot ready. Then Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah each went out in his chariot to meet Jehu. And they met him at the property of Naboth the Jezreelite.
22 Now when Joram saw Jehu, he said, “Is it peace, Jehu?” And he answered, “What peace, so long as the harlotries of your mother Jezebel and her sorceries are so many?”
23 Then Joram turned his hands and fled and said to Ahaziah, “Treachery, O Ahaziah!”
24 And Jehu drew his bow with full strength and struck Joram between the shoulders, and the arrow went through his heart, and he sank down in his chariot.
25 Then Jehu said to Bidkar, his officer, “Take him up and throw him on the field of Naboth the Jezreelite. For remember, when you and I rode together behind Ahab his father, the LORD pronounced this oracle against him:
26 ‘Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth and the blood of his sons,’ declares the LORD, ‘and I will repay you in this field,’ declares the LORD. Now therefore take him and throw him on the field, according to the word of the LORD.”


27 When Ahaziah, king of Judah, saw this, he fled in the direction of Beth-haggan. And Jehu pursued him and said, “Strike him down also in the chariot.” So they struck him down at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. But he fled to Megiddo and died there.
28 And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem and buried him in his tomb with his fathers in the city of David.
29 In the eleventh year of Joram son of Ahab, Ahaziah became king over Judah.


30 When Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it. And she painted her eyes and adorned her head and looked out of the window.
31 As Jehu entered the gate, she said, “Do you bring peace, Zimri, slayer of your master?”
32 And he lifted up his face to the window and said, “Who is on my side? Who?” And two or three eunuchs looked down at him.
33 And he said, “Throw her down.” So they threw her down, and some of her blood spattered on the wall and on the horses, and he trampled her underfoot.
34 Then he went in and ate and drank, and said, “See now to this cursed woman and bury her, for she is a king’s daughter.”
35 But when they went to bury her, they found no more of her than the skull and the feet and the palms of her hands.
36 So they returned and told him. And he said, “This is the word of the LORD which He spoke by His servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, ‘In the territory of Jezreel the dogs shall eat the flesh of Jezebel,
37 and the corpse of Jezebel shall be as dung on the surface of the field in the territory of Jezreel, so that they cannot say, “This is Jezebel.”’”




Chapter 10


1 Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, the elders, and to the guardians of the sons of Ahab, saying,
2 “Now when this letter comes to you, since your master’s sons are with you, and you have chariots and horses and a fortified city and weapons,
3 select the best and most upright of your master’s sons, set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.”
4 But they were exceedingly afraid and said, “If two kings could not stand before him, how then can we stand?”
5 So the overseer of the palace, and the overseer of the city, and the elders, and the guardians sent word to Jehu, saying, “We are your servants, and we will do all that you say to us. We will not make anyone king. Do whatever is good in your eyes.”


6 Then he wrote a second letter to them, saying, “If you are for me and obey my voice, take the heads of the men—your master’s sons—and come to me at Jezreel tomorrow at this time.” Now the king’s sons, seventy men, were with the great men of the city, who were bringing them up.
7 And when the letter came to them, they took the king’s sons and slaughtered seventy persons and put their heads in baskets and sent them to him at Jezreel.
8 When the messenger came and told him, saying, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons,” he said, “Lay them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until morning.”
9 In the morning he went out and stood and said to all the people, “You are innocent. Behold, I conspired against my master and killed him. But who struck all these?
10 Know then that not one word of the LORD shall fall to the ground, which the LORD spoke concerning the house of Ahab. For the LORD has done what He spoke through His servant Elijah.”
11 So Jehu struck down all who remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, all his great men and his acquaintances and his priests, until he left him no survivor.


12 Then he arose, left that place, and traveled to Samaria. On the way, at Beth-eked of the shepherds,
13 Jehu met the relatives of Ahaziah king of Judah, and he said, “Who are you?” And they said, “We are the relatives of Ahaziah, and we have come down to greet the sons of the king and the sons of the queen mother.”
14 Then he said, “Take them alive.” So they took them alive and slaughtered them at the pit of Beth-eked, forty-two men, and he left none of them.


15 And when he departed from there, he met Jehonadab, son of Rechab, coming to meet him. And he greeted him and said, “Is your heart upright, as my heart is with your heart?” And Jehonadab answered, “It is.” “If it is,” said Jehu, “give me your hand.” So he gave him his hand, and he took him up to him into the chariot.
16 And he said, “Come with me and see my zeal for the LORD.” So he made him ride in his chariot.
17 And when he came to Samaria, he struck down all who remained to Ahab in Samaria, until he had destroyed them, according to the word of the LORD which He spoke to Elijah.


18 Then Jehu assembled all the people and said to them, “Ahab served Baal a little; Jehu will serve him much.
19 Now,  therefore, call to me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshipers and all his priests. Let none be missing, for I have a great sacrifice to offer to Baal. Whoever is missing shall not live.” But Jehu did it with cunning, in order to destroy the worshipers of Baal.
20 And Jehu said, “Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal.” So they proclaimed it.
21 And Jehu sent throughout all Israel, and all the worshipers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left who did not come. And they went into the house of Baal, and the house of Baal was filled from end to end.
22 Then he said to the one in charge of the wardrobe, “Bring out garments for all the worshipers of Baal.” So he brought out garments for them.
23 And Jehu and Jehonadab, son of Rechab, went into the house of Baal. And he said to the worshipers of Baal, “Search and see that none of the servants of the LORD are here with you, but only the worshipers of Baal.”


24 Then they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had stationed eighty men outside and said, “If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escapes, your life shall be for his life.”
25 Then it came to pass, as soon as he had finished offering the burnt offering, Jehu said to the guards and the officers, “Go in, strike them down; let no one escape.” And they struck them with the edge of the sword, and the guards and the officers threw them out and went into the inner room of the house of Baal.
26 And they brought out the pillar of the house of Baal and burned it.
27 They also broke down the pillar of Baal, and they tore down the house of Baal and made it a latrine to this day.


28 So Jehu wiped out Baal from Israel.
29 But Jehu did not turn aside from the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he made Israel sin—that is, the golden calves that were in Bethel and in Dan.
30 And the LORD said to Jehu, “Because you have done well in executing what is right in My eyes, and have done to the house of Ahab all that was in My heart, your sons shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.”
31 But Jehu was not careful to walk in the law of the LORD, the God of Israel, with all his heart. He did not turn from the sins of Jeroboam, which he made Israel sin.


32 In those days the LORD began to reduce Israel, and Hazael struck them throughout all the territory of Israel:
33 from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead—the Gadites, the Reubenites, and the Manassites—from Aroer, which is by the Arnon Valley, even Gilead and Bashan.


34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
35 And Jehu slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his place.
36 The time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.




Chapter 11


1 Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal offspring.
2 But Jehosheba, the daughter of King Joram and sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the king’s sons who were being put to death. She placed him and his nurse in a bedroom. So they hid him from Athaliah, and he was not put to death.
3 And he remained hidden with her in the house of the LORD for six years while Athaliah reigned over the land.


4 In the seventh year Jehoiada sent and brought the captains of hundreds of the Carites and of the guards, and brought them to him in the house of the LORD. And he made a covenant with them and put them under oath in the house of the LORD, and showed them the king’s son.
5 And he commanded them, saying, “This is the thing you shall do: One third of you who come on duty on the Sabbath shall guard the king’s house,
6 and one third shall be at the gate Sur, and one third shall be at the gate behind the guards. You shall take turns guarding the house.
7 The two divisions of you, even all who go off duty on the Sabbath, shall also guard the house of the LORD for the king.
8 Then you shall surround the king on every side, every man with his weapons in his hand. And whoever comes within the ranks shall be put to death. Be with the king when he goes out and when he comes in.”


9 So the captains of hundreds did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. Each took his men who were to come on duty on the Sabbath, with those who were to go off duty on the Sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.
10 The priest gave to the captains of hundreds the spears and shields that had been King David’s, which were in the house of the LORD.
11 And the guards stood, each with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, by the altar and by the house, around the king.
12 Then he brought out the king’s son and put the crown on him and gave him the testimony. And they made him king and anointed him, and they clapped their hands and said, “Long live the king!”


13 When Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and the people, she came to the people at the house of the LORD.
14 And she looked, and behold, the king was standing by the pillar, according to the custom, and the captains and the trumpeters beside the king, and all the people of the land rejoicing and blowing trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and cried, “Treason! Treason!”
15 Then Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds who were set over the army and said to them, “Bring her out between the ranks, and whoever follows her, put to death with the sword.” For the priest had said, “Let her not be put to death in the house of the LORD.”
16 So they laid hands on her, and she went by the way of the horses’ entrance to the king’s house, and there she was put to death.


17 Then Jehoiada made a covenant between the LORD and the king and the people, that they should be the LORD’s people, also between the king and the people.
18 And all the people of the land went to the house of Baal and tore it down; they thoroughly broke in pieces its altars and images, and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of the LORD.
19 And he took the captains of hundreds and the Carites and the guards and all the people of the land, and they brought the king down from the house of the LORD, and came by the way of the gate of the guards to the king’s house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.
20 So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet, for they had put Athaliah to death with the sword at the king’s house.
21 Jehoash was seven years old when he began to reign.




Chapter 12


1 In the seventh year of Jehu, Jehoash began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba.
2 And Jehoash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all his days, because Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
3 Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away; the people continued to sacrifice and burn incense on the high places.


4 And Jehoash said to the priests, “All the money of the holy things that is brought into the house of the LORD, the money each man is assessed, the money from the assessments of persons, and the money that a man's heart prompts him to bring into the house of the LORD,
5 let the priests take, each from his donor, and let them repair the damages of the Temple wherever any damage is found.”
6 But by the twenty-third year of King Jehoash, the priests had not repaired the damage to the Temple.
7 So King Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest and the other priests and said to them, “Why are you not repairing the damage of the Temple? Now then, take no more money from your donors, but give it for the repair of the house.”
8 So the priests agreed that they would take no more money from the people, and that they would not repair the damage of the Temple.


9 Then Jehoiada the priest took a chest and bored a hole in its lid, and he set it beside the altar on the right side as one entered the house of the LORD. And the priests who guarded the threshold put in it all the money that was brought into the house of the LORD.
10 And whenever they saw that there was much money in the chest, the king’s scribe and the high priest came up and tied it in bags and counted the money that was found in the house of the LORD.
11 Then they gave the money that was weighed out into the hands of those who did the work, who had the oversight of the house of the LORD. And they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders who worked on the house of the LORD,
12 and to the masons and the stonecutters, and to buy timber and quarried stone to repair the damage of the house of the LORD, and for all that was spent for the house to repair it.
13 But there were not made for the house of the LORD silver basins, snuffers, bowls, trumpets, or any vessels of gold or of silver, from the money that was brought into the house of the LORD,
14 for that was given to those who did the work, and with it they repaired the house of the LORD.
15 Moreover, they did not require an accounting from the men into whose hands they gave the money to pay out to the workmen, for they dealt honestly.
16 The money from the guilt offerings and the money from the sin offerings was not brought into the house of the LORD; it belonged to the priests.


17 Then Hazael king of Aram went up and fought against Gath and captured it. And Hazael set his face to go up against Jerusalem.
18 So Jehoash king of Judah took all the sacred gifts that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah his fathers, the kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own sacred gifts, and all the gold that was found in the treasuries of the house of the LORD and in the king’s house, and he sent it to Hazael king of Aram. Then he went away from Jerusalem.


19 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
20 And his servants arose and conspired and struck Jehoash down at the house of Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla.
21 For Jozacar the son of Shimeath and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, struck him, and he died. And they buried him with his fathers in the city of David, and Amaziah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 13


1 In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned seventeen years.
2 He did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin; he did not depart from them.
3 So the anger of the LORD was kindled against Israel, and He gave them continually into the hand of Hazael king of Aram and into the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael.


4 Then Jehoahaz sought the favor of the LORD, and the LORD listened to him, for He saw the oppression of Israel, how the king of Aram oppressed them.
5 Therefore the LORD gave Israel a savior, so that they escaped from under the hand of Aram, and the sons of Israel lived in their tents as formerly.
6 Nevertheless, they did not depart from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, which he made Israel to sin, but walked in them; and the Asherah also remained standing in Samaria.
7 For he had not left to Jehoahaz an army of more than fifty horsemen and ten chariots and ten thousand foot soldiers, for the king of Aram had destroyed them and made them like the dust at threshing.


8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz and all that he did and his might, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
9 And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria, and Joash his son reigned in his place.


10 In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned sixteen years.
11 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD; he did not turn away from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin, but he walked in them.
12 Now the rest of the acts of Joash and all that he did, and his might with which he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
13 So Joash slept with his fathers, and Jeroboam sat on his throne. And Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.


14 Now Elisha had fallen sick with the illness of which he would die. So Joash king of Israel came down to him and wept over him and said, “My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and its horsemen!”
15 And Elisha said to him, “Take a bow and arrows.” So he took a bow and arrows.
16 Then he said to the king of Israel, “Draw the bow,” and he drew it. And Elisha laid his hands on the king’s hands.
17 And he said, “Open the window eastward,” and he opened it. Then Elisha said, “Shoot,” and he shot. And he said, “The LORD’s arrow of victory, even the arrow of victory over Aram! For you shall strike the Arameans in Aphek until you have destroyed them.”
18 Then he said, “Take the arrows,” and he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, “Strike the ground,” and he struck it three times and stopped.
19 So the man of God was angry with him and said, “You should have struck five or six times, then you would have struck Aram until you had destroyed it. But now you shall strike Aram only three times.”


20 Then Elisha died, and they buried him. Now bands of Moabite raiders would enter the land in the spring of the year.
21 And it came about, as they were burying a man, they saw a band of raiders, so they cast the man into the grave of Elisha. And when the man's corpse touched the bones of Elisha, he revived and stood up on his feet.


22 Now Hazael king of Aram had oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
23 But the LORD was gracious to them and had compassion on them and turned toward them because of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and He was not willing to destroy them, nor has He cast them from His presence until now.


24 When Hazael king of Aram died, Ben-hadad his son became king in his place.
25 Then Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again from the hand of Ben-hadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had taken in war from the hand of Jehoahaz his father. Three times Joash defeated him, and he recovered the cities of Israel.




Chapter 14


1 In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, began to reign.
2 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
3 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, yet not like David his father. He did according to all that his father Joash had done.
4 However, the high places were not removed; the people continued to sacrifice and burn incense on the high places.
5 And it came about, as soon as the kingdom was firmly in his hand, that he struck down his servants who had struck down the king his father.
6 But the sons of the assassins he did not put to death, according to what is written in the Book of the Law of Moses, where the LORD commanded, saying, “Fathers shall not be put to death for sons, and sons shall not be put to death for fathers; but each one shall be put to death for his own sin.”


7 He struck down ten thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt and captured Sela in battle, and he called its name Joktheel to this day.


8 Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come, let us meet face to face.”
9 But Jehoash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, “A thistle in Lebanon sent to a cedar in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as a wife.’ But a wild beast of Lebanon passed by and trampled the thistle.
10 You have indeed struck down Edom, and your heart has lifted you up. Be content with your glory and stay at home. Why should you provoke trouble so that you fall—you and Judah with you?”


11 But Amaziah would not listen. So Jehoash king of Israel went up, and he and Amaziah king of Judah confronted each other at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
12 And Judah was defeated by Israel, and they fled, each to his tent.
13 Then Jehoash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, son of Jehoash, son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh. And he came to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Gate of Ephraim to the Corner Gate, four hundred cubits.
14 And he took all the gold and silver and all the utensils that were found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s house, along with hostages, and returned to Samaria.


15 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash that he did, and his might and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
16 And Jehoash slept with his fathers and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel, and Jeroboam his son became king in his place.


17 Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, lived fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel.
18 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
19 And they conspired against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish and killed him there.
20 And they brought him on horses, and he was buried in Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.


21 And all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.
22 He rebuilt Elath and restored it to Judah after the king slept with his fathers.


23 In the fifteenth year of Amaziah son of Joash, king of Judah, Jeroboam son of Joash, king of Israel, began to reign in Samaria, and he reigned forty-one years.
24 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD; he did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.
25 He restored the border of Israel from Lebo-hamath as far as the Sea of the Arabah, according to the word of the LORD, the God of Israel, which He spoke through His servant Jonah son of Amittai, the prophet, who was from Gath-hepher.
26 For the LORD saw that the affliction of Israel was very bitter, and that there was neither bond nor free, and there was no helper for Israel.
27 But the LORD had not said that He would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, so He saved them by the hand of Jeroboam son of Joash.


28 Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam and all that he did and his might, how he fought and how he recovered Damascus and Hamath for Israel, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
29 And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, with the kings of Israel, and Zechariah his son became king in his place.




Chapter 15


1 In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Azariah the son of Amaziah king of Judah began to reign.
2 He was sixteen years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
3 He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Amaziah had done.
4 Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places.
5 And the LORD struck the king, so that he was a leper to the day of his death, and he lived in a separate house. And Jotham, the king’s son, was over the household, governing the people of the land.
6 Now the rest of the acts of Azariah and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
7 And Azariah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David, and Jotham his son reigned in his place.


8 In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months.
9 He did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, as his fathers had done. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.
10 Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and struck him down before the people, and killed him, and reigned in his place.
11 Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.
12 This was the word of the LORD that he spoke to Jehu: “Your sons shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.” And so it came to pass.


13 Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, and he reigned one month in Samaria.
14 Then Menahem the son of Gadi came up from Tirzah and came to Samaria, and struck down Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria and killed him, and reigned in his place.
15 Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and the conspiracy that he made, behold, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.


16 Then Menahem struck Tiphsah and all who were in it and its territory from Tirzah, because they did not open it to him; therefore he struck it, and he ripped open all the women who were pregnant.
17 In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi began to reign over Israel, and he reigned ten years in Samaria.
18 He did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD. He did not depart all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.


19 Pul the king of Assyria came against the land, and Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.
20 Menahem exacted the money from Israel, from all the mighty men of wealth, fifty shekels of silver from each man, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back and did not stay there in the land.
21 Now the rest of the acts of Menahem and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel?
22 And Menahem slept with his fathers, and Pekahiah his son reigned in his place.


23 In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned two years.
24 He did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD and did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.
25 And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him and struck him down in Samaria in the citadel of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh; he had with him fifty men of the Gileadites. And he killed him and reigned in his place.
26 Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah and all that he did, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.


27 In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned twenty years.
28 He did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which he made Israel to sin.
29 In the days of Pekah, king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came and captured Ijon, Abel-beth-maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried the people captive to Assyria.
30 Then Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah and struck him and killed him, and reigned in his place in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.
31 Now the rest of the acts of Pekah and all that he did, they are written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel.


32 In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah began to reign.
33 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
34 He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah had done.
35 Nevertheless, the high places were not removed; the people still sacrificed and burned incense on the high places. He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD.
36 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
37 In those days the LORD began to send Rezin the king of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah against Judah.
38 And Jotham slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father, and Ahaz his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 16


1 In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.
2 Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned for sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the eyes of the LORD his God, as his father David had done,
3 but he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel. He even caused his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom the LORD had driven out before the sons of Israel.
4 And he sacrificed and burned incense on the high places and on the hills and under every green tree.


5 Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to wage war. They besieged Ahaz but could not overcome him.
6 At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath for Syria and drove the men of Judah out of Elath, and the Syrians came to Elath and have lived there to this day.
7 So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, “I am your servant and your son. Come up and deliver me from the hand of the king of Syria and from the hand of the king of Israel, who are rising up against me.”
8 Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king's house, and sent it as a gift to the king of Assyria.
9 So the king of Assyria listened to him. And the king of Assyria went up against Damascus and captured it and carried its people captive to Kir, and he killed Rezin.


10 Then King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria. And he saw the altar that was at Damascus, and King Ahaz sent to Uriah the priest the pattern of the altar and its model, according to all its workmanship.
11 So Uriah the priest built the altar according to all that King Ahaz had sent from Damascus. Uriah the priest made it before King Ahaz came from Damascus.
12 When the king came from Damascus and saw the altar, the king approached the altar and offered sacrifices on it.
13 He burned his burnt offering and his grain offering and poured out his drink offering and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings on the altar.


14 And the bronze altar that was before the LORD he brought from the front of the house, from between the altar and the house of the LORD, and he put it on the north side of the new altar.
15 Then King Ahaz commanded Uriah the priest, saying, “Upon the great altar offer the morning burnt offering and the evening grain offering and the king’s burnt offering and his grain offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land and their grain offering and their drink offerings. And sprinkle on it all the blood of the burnt offering and all the blood of the sacrifice. But the bronze altar shall be for me to inquire by.”


16 So Uriah the priest did according to all that King Ahaz commanded.
17 And King Ahaz cut off the frames of the stands and removed the basins from them, and he took down the sea from off the bronze oxen that were under it and put it on a pavement of stone.
18 And the covered way for the Sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king’s outer entrance, he removed from the house of the LORD because of the king of Assyria.
19 Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
20 And Ahaz slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Hezekiah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 17


1 In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea son of Elah became king over Israel in Samaria, and he reigned nine years.
2 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, yet not as the kings of Israel who were before him.
3 Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against him, and Hoshea became his servant and paid him tribute.
4 But the king of Assyria found treachery in Hoshea, for he had sent messengers to So, king of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year. Therefore the king of Assyria shut him up and bound him in prison.
5 Then the king of Assyria went up against all the land, and he went up to Samaria and besieged it for three years.
6 In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria captured Samaria, and he carried Israel away to Assyria and settled them in Halah and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.


7 Now this came about because the sons of Israel sinned against the LORD their God, who had brought them up from the land of Egypt, from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods.
8 And they walked in the statutes of the nations whom the LORD had driven out before the sons of Israel, and in the statutes of the kings of Israel, which they had made.
9 And the sons of Israel secretly did things that were not right against the LORD their God. They built for themselves high places in all their towns, from watchtower to fortified city.
10 They set up for themselves pillars and Asherim on every high hill and under every green tree,
11 and they burned incense there on all the high places, like the nations whom the LORD had exiled before them. They did evil things, provoking the LORD to anger.
12 They served idols, about which the LORD had said to them, “You shall not do this thing.”


13 Yet the LORD had warned Israel and Judah through all his prophets and every seer, saying, “Turn from your evil ways and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.”
14 But they did not listen, and they stiffened their necks like the necks of their fathers, who did not believe in the LORD their God.
15 They rejected his statutes and his covenant that he had made with their fathers and his warnings with which he had warned them. They followed vanity and became vain, and followed after the nations that surrounded them, about whom the LORD had commanded them not to do like them.
16 They abandoned all the commandments of the LORD their God and made for themselves cast images, two calves, and made an Asherah and bowed down to all the host of heaven and served Baal.
17 And they made their sons and their daughters pass through the fire, and they practiced divination and augury and sold themselves to do what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, provoking him to anger.
18 So the LORD was very angry with Israel and removed them from his presence; none was left except the tribe of Judah alone.


19 Judah also did not keep the commandments of the LORD their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel, which they had made.
20 So the LORD rejected all the descendants of Israel and afflicted them and gave them into the hand of plunderers, until he had cast them out of his presence.
21 For he tore Israel from the house of David, and they made Jeroboam son of Nebat king. And Jeroboam drove Israel away from following the LORD and made them commit great sin.
22 And the sons of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam that he did; they did not depart from them,
23 until the LORD removed Israel from his presence, as he had spoken through all his servants the prophets. So Israel was exiled from its own land to Assyria until this day.


24 Then the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and settled them in the cities of Samaria in place of the sons of Israel. And they took possession of Samaria and lived in its cities.
25 At the beginning of their dwelling there, they did not fear the LORD. Therefore the LORD sent lions among them, and they killed some of them.
26 So they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying, “The nations which you have carried away and settled in the cities of Samaria do not know the law of the god of the land. Therefore he has sent lions among them, and behold, they are killing them, because they do not know the law of the god of the land.”
27 Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, “Take there one of the priests whom you carried away from there, and let him go and live there, and let him teach them the law of the god of the land.”
28 So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and lived in Bethel, and he taught them how they should fear the LORD.


29 But every nation made its own gods and set them in the shrines of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities in which they lived.
30 And the men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, the men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima,
31 and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak, and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelek and Anammelek, the gods of Sepharvaim.
32 They also feared the LORD and appointed from among themselves priests of the high places, who acted for them in the shrines of the high places.
33 They feared the LORD and served their own gods, according to the custom of the nations from which they had been exiled.


34 To this day they act according to the former customs. They do not fear the LORD, and they do not do according to their statutes, or their ordinances, or the law, or the commandment that the LORD commanded the sons of Jacob, whom he named Israel.
35 The LORD had made a covenant with them and commanded them, saying, “You shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them nor serve them nor sacrifice to them.
36 But the LORD, who brought you up from the land of Egypt with great power and an outstretched arm, him you shall fear, and to him you shall bow yourselves, and to him you shall sacrifice.
37 And the statutes and the ordinances and the law and the commandment that he wrote for you, you shall observe to do forever. And you shall not fear other gods.
38 And the covenant that I have made with you, you shall not forget, nor shall you fear other gods.
39 But the LORD your God you shall fear, and he will deliver you from the hand of all your enemies.”


40 Yet they did not listen, but they acted according to their former custom.
41 So these nations feared the LORD and also served their carved images; their children likewise, and their children’s children—as their fathers did, so they do until this day.




Chapter 18


1 Now it came about in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.
2 He was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abi, daughter of Zechariah.
3 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.
4 He removed the high places, and broke down the pillars, and cut down the Asherah. And he broke in pieces the bronze serpent that Moses had made, for until those days the sons of Israel had been burning incense to it; and he called it Nehushtan.
5 He trusted in the LORD, the God of Israel, so that after him there was none like him among all the kings of Judah, nor among those who were before him.
6 For he clung to the LORD; he did not turn away from following him, but kept his commandments, which the LORD commanded Moses.
7 And the LORD was with him; wherever he went he prospered. And he rebelled against the king of Assyria and did not serve him.
8 He struck the Philistines as far as Gaza and its territory, from watchtower to fortified city.


9 Now it came about in the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser, king of Assyria, came up against Samaria and besieged it.
10 And at the end of three years they captured it. In the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was captured.
11 Then the king of Assyria carried Israel away to Assyria and settled them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes,
12 because they did not listen to the voice of the LORD their God, but transgressed his covenant, even all that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded. They neither listened nor obeyed.


13 In the fourteenth year of King Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and captured them.
14 Then Hezekiah, king of Judah, sent to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, “I have sinned. Withdraw from me; whatever you impose on me I will bear.” So the king of Assyria required of Hezekiah, king of Judah, three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
15 And Hezekiah gave all the silver that was found in the house of the LORD and in the treasuries of the king’s house.
16 At that time Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of the LORD and from the doorposts which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.


17 Then the king of Assyria sent the commander-in-chief, the chief officer, and the chief of staff from Lachish to King Hezekiah with a great army to Jerusalem. So they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they went up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is on the highway to the fuller’s field.
18 When they called for the king, Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the recorder, went out to them.
19 And the chief of staff said to them, “Say now to Hezekiah, ‘Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria: What is this confidence in which you trust?
20 You say (but they are only empty words), “There is counsel and might for war.” Now on whom do you rely, that you have rebelled against me?
21 Now behold, you rely on the staff of this broken reed, on Egypt, which, if a man leans on it, it will pierce his hand. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who rely on him.
22 But if you say to me, “We rely on the LORD our God,” is it not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has removed, saying to Judah and to Jerusalem, “You shall bow down before this altar in Jerusalem”?
23 Now therefore, I urge you, make a bargain with my master, the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses—if you are able on your part to set riders on them.
24 How then can you repulse one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and rely on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
25 Have I now come up without the LORD’s approval against this place to destroy it? The LORD said to me, “Go up against this land and destroy it.”’”


26 Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah, and Shebna, and Joah said to the chief of staff, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it; and do not speak with us in Judean in the ears of the people who are on the wall.”
27 But the chief of staff said to them, “Has my master sent me only to your master and to you to speak these words, and not to the men who sit on the wall, who will eat their dung and drink their urine with you?”
28 Then the chief of staff stood and cried with a loud voice in Judean, and said, “Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria.
29 Thus says the king: ‘Do not let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you from my hand.
30 Nor let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, “The LORD will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.”
31 Do not listen to Hezekiah, for thus says the king of Assyria: “Make your peace with me, and come out to me, and each of you shall eat of his own vine and each of his own fig tree, and each of you shall drink the water of his own cistern,
32 until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive oil and honey, that you may live and not die.” But do not listen to Hezekiah, when he misleads you, saying, “The LORD will deliver us.”
33 Has any of the gods of the nations delivered his land from the hand of the king of Assyria?
34 Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, Hena, and Ivvah? Have they delivered Samaria from my hand?
35 Who among all the gods of the lands have delivered their land from my hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem from my hand?’”


36 But the people were silent and did not answer him a word, for the commandment of the king was, “Do not answer him.”
37 Then Eliakim son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and they reported to him the words of the chief of staff.




Chapter 19


1 Now when King Hezekiah heard this, he tore his clothes, covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of the LORD.
2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz.
3 They said to him, “Thus says Hezekiah: This day is a day of distress, of rebuke, and of disgrace; for children have come to the point of birth, and there is no strength to deliver.
4 It may be the LORD your God will hear all the words of the chief of staff, whom his master the king of Assyria has sent to reproach the living God, and will rebuke the words which the LORD your God has heard. Therefore lift up a prayer for the remnant that is left.”


5 So the servants of King Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
6 And Isaiah said to them, “Thus you shall say to your master, ‘Thus says the LORD: Do not be afraid because of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
7 Watch and you will see that I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear a rumor and shall return to his own land. And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.’”


8 Then the chief of staff returned and found the king of Assyria fighting against Libnah, for he had heard that he had withdrawn from Lachish.
9 Now he heard them say of Tirhakah king of Cush, “Look, he has set out to fight against you.” So he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying,
10 “Thus you shall say to Hezekiah king of Judah: Do not let your God in whom you trust deceive you, saying, ‘Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.’
11 You have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all the lands, devoting them to destruction. And yet will you be delivered?
12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them, the nations that my fathers destroyed—Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the sons of Eden who were in Telassar?
13 Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and of Ivvah?”


14 Then Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and read it. And Hezekiah went up to the house of the LORD and spread it out before the LORD.
15 And Hezekiah prayed before the LORD and said, “O LORD, the God of Israel, who sits above the cherubim, you alone are God of all the kingdoms of the earth; you have made heaven and earth.
16 Incline your ear, O LORD, and hear; open your eyes, O LORD, and see; and hear the words of Sennacherib, which he has sent to reproach the living God.
17 Truly, O LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands,
18 and have cast their gods into the fire, for they were not gods but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them.
19 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us, I pray, from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you, O LORD, are God alone.”


20 Then Isaiah son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: That which you have prayed to me about Sennacherib king of Assyria I have heard.
21 This is the word that the LORD has spoken concerning him:


The virgin daughter of Zion despises you, she scorns you;
the daughter of Jerusalem shakes her head behind you.


22 Whom have you reproached and blasphemed?
Against whom have you raised your voice
and lifted up your eyes on high?
Against the Holy One of Israel!


23 By your messengers you have reproached the Lord,
and you have said, ‘With the multitude of my chariots
I have gone up to the height of the mountains,
to the remotest parts of Lebanon;
and I cut down its tall cedars,
its choice cypresses,
and I entered its farthest lodging place,
its thickest forest.


24 I dug wells and drank foreign waters,
and with the sole of my feet I dried up
all the rivers of Egypt.’


25 Have you not heard? Long ago I made it,
from days of old I formed it.
Now I have brought it to pass,
that you should turn fortified cities
into heaps of ruin.


26 Therefore their inhabitants, powerless,
were dismayed and put to shame;
they were like the grass of the field and the green herb,
like grass on the housetops, scorched before it grows.


27 But I know your sitting down and your going out and your coming in,
and your raging against me.


28 Because you have raged against me,
and your arrogance has come up to my ears,
therefore I will put my hook in your nose
and my bridle in your lips,
and I will turn you back
by the way in which you came.


29 And this shall be the sign for you: This year you shall eat what grows of itself, and in the second year what springs of the same; then in the third year sow and reap, plant vineyards and eat their fruit.
30 The surviving remnant of the house of Judah shall again take root downward and bear fruit upward.
31 For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and out of Mount Zion survivors. The zeal of the LORD will perform this.


32 Therefore thus says the LORD concerning the king of Assyria: He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come before it with shield, nor cast up a siege ramp against it.
33 By the way that he came, by the same he shall return, and into this city he shall not come, declares the LORD.
34 For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake and for the sake of David my servant.”


35 And that night the angel of the LORD went out and struck one hundred and eighty-five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians. And when men arose early in the morning, they saw all the dead bodies.
36 So Sennacherib, king of Assyria, departed and went back, and lived in Nineveh.
37 And it came about, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him down with the sword, and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esarhaddon his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 20


1 In those days Hezekiah became sick to the point of death. And Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him and said to him, “Thus says the LORD: Set your house in order, for you shall die and not live.”
2 Then he turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD, saying,
3 “Remember now, O LORD, I pray, how I have walked before you in truth and with a whole heart, and have done what is good in your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.


4 And it came to pass, before Isaiah had gone out to the middle court, that the word of the LORD came to him, saying,
5 “Return and say to Hezekiah the leader of my people, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of David your father: I have heard your prayer, I have seen your tears. Behold, I will heal you; on the third day you shall go up to the house of the LORD.
6 And I will add to your days fifteen years, and I will deliver you and this city from the hand of the king of Assyria; and I will defend this city for my own sake and for the sake of David my servant.’”
7 Then Isaiah said, “Take a cake of figs.” So they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.


8 Now Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “What shall be the sign that the LORD will heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of the LORD the third day?”
9 And Isaiah said, “This shall be the sign to you from the LORD, that the LORD will do the thing that he has spoken: shall the shadow go forward ten steps, or shall it go back ten steps?”
10 And Hezekiah answered, “It is easy for the shadow to go forward ten steps; no, but let the shadow turn backward ten steps.”
11 So Isaiah the prophet cried to the LORD, and he brought the shadow ten steps backward, by which it had gone down on the steps of Ahaz.


12 At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a gift to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
13 And Hezekiah gave heed to them, and showed them all his treasure house—the silver and the gold and the spices and the precious oil—and his armory, and all that was found among his treasures; there was nothing in his house or in all his dominion that Hezekiah did not show them.
14 Then Isaiah the prophet came to King Hezekiah and said to him, “What did these men say, and from where did they come to you?” And Hezekiah said, “They have come from a far country, from Babylon.”
15 And he said, “What have they seen in your house?” And Hezekiah answered, “They have seen all that is in my house; there is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.”


16 Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of the LORD:
17 Behold, the days are coming when all that is in your house, and what your fathers have laid up in store to this day, shall be carried to Babylon; nothing shall be left, says the LORD.
18 And some of your own sons who shall issue from you, whom you shall father, shall be taken away; and they shall become eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.”
19 Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “The word of the LORD which you have spoken is good.” For he thought, “Is it not so, if there will be peace and truth in my days?”


20 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and all his might, and how he made the pool and the conduit and brought water into the city, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
21 So Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and Manasseh his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 21


1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Hephzibah.
2 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according to the abominations of the nations whom the LORD dispossessed before the sons of Israel.
3 For he rebuilt the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed, and he erected altars for Baal and made an Asherah, as Ahab king of Israel had done, and he worshiped all the host of heaven and served them.
4 He built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “In Jerusalem I will put my name.”
5 And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.
6 And he made his son pass through the fire, practiced soothsaying and divination, and dealt with mediums and with spiritists. He did much evil in the eyes of the LORD, provoking him to anger.


7 He set the carved image of Asherah that he had made in the house of which the LORD had said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen from all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever;
8 and I will not again cause the foot of Israel to wander from the land that I gave their fathers, if only they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.”
9 But they did not listen, and Manasseh led them astray to do more evil than the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the sons of Israel.


10 And the LORD spoke by his servants the prophets, saying,
11 “Because Manasseh king of Judah has committed these abominations, having done more evil than all that the Amorites did who were before him, and has made Judah also to sin with his idols,
12 therefore thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Behold, I am bringing such evil on Jerusalem and Judah that whoever hears of it, both his ears shall tingle.
13 And I will stretch over Jerusalem the measuring line of Samaria and the plumb line of the house of Ahab, and I will wipe Jerusalem as one wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
14 I will forsake the remnant of my inheritance and give them into the hand of their enemies, and they shall become plunder and spoil to all their enemies,
15 because they have done what is evil in my eyes and have been provoking me to anger since the day their fathers came out of Egypt, even to this day.”


16 Moreover, Manasseh shed very much innocent blood until he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another, besides his sin by which he made Judah to sin, in doing what was evil in the eyes of the LORD.
17 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh and all that he did, and his sin that he committed, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
18 And Manasseh slept with his fathers and was buried in the garden of his house, in the garden of Uzza; and Amon his son reigned in his place.


19 Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Meshullemeth, the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
20 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, as Manasseh his father had done.
21 He walked in all the way in which his father had walked, and served the idols that his father had served, and worshiped them.
22 He forsook the LORD, the God of his fathers, and did not walk in the way of the LORD.


23 And the servants of Amon conspired against him and put the king to death in his own house.
24 But the people of the land struck down all those who had conspired against King Amon, and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place.


25 Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
26 And he was buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzza, and Josiah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 22


1 Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, and walked in all the way of David his father, and did not turn aside to the right or to the left.


3 Now in the eighteenth year of King Josiah, the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of the LORD, saying,
4 “Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may count the money brought into the house of the LORD which the doorkeepers have collected from the people,
5 and let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of the LORD, and let them give it to the workmen who are in the house of the LORD, to repair the breaches of the house,
6 to the carpenters and the builders and the masons, and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house.
7 But no accounting shall be asked of them for the money that is delivered into their hand, for they deal faithfully.”


8 Then Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD.” And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it.
9 And Shaphan the scribe came to the king and brought word back to the king, and said, “Your servants have emptied out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of the LORD.”
10 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, “Hilkiah the priest has given me a book.” And Shaphan read it before the king.
11 And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the Book of the Law, that he tore his clothes.


12 And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant, saying,
13 “Go, inquire of the LORD for me and for the people and for all Judah concerning the words of this book that has been found, for great is the wrath of the LORD that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not listened to the words of this book, to do according to all that is written concerning us.”


14 So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tikvah, son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (she dwelt in Jerusalem in the Second Quarter); and they spoke with her.
15 And she said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Tell the man who sent you to me,
16 ‘Thus says the LORD: Behold, I am bringing evil on this place and on its inhabitants, all the words of the book which the king of Judah has read,
17 because they have forsaken me and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the work of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and it shall not be quenched.’


18 But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus you shall say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Concerning the words that you have heard,
19 because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before the LORD when you heard what I spoke against this place and its inhabitants, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and you tore your clothes and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares the LORD.
20 Therefore, I will gather you to your fathers, and you shall be gathered to your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place.’” And they brought back word to the king.




Chapter 23


1 Then the king sent, and they gathered to him all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
2 And the king went up to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great; and he read in their hearing all the words of the Book of the Covenant that had been found in the house of the LORD.
3 And the king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all his heart and all his soul, to perform the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people entered into the covenant.


4 Then the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the doorkeepers, to bring out of the temple of the LORD all the vessels that were made for Baal, for Asherah, and for all the host of heaven. And he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron, and carried their ashes to Bethel.
5 And he did away with the idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah had appointed to burn incense on the high places in the cities of Judah and in the surroundings of Jerusalem—those who burned incense to Baal, to the sun and the moon and the constellations and all the host of heaven.
6 And he brought out the Asherah from the house of the LORD, outside Jerusalem, to the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron and ground it to dust, and threw its dust on the graves of the sons of the people.
7 He also tore down the houses of the male cult prostitutes which were in the house of the LORD, where the women were weaving hangings for the Asherah.
8 And he brought all the priests from the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beersheba. And he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man’s left at the city gate.
9 Nevertheless the priests of the high places did not go up to the altar of the LORD in Jerusalem, but they ate unleavened bread among their brothers.


10 He also defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of Ben-Hinnom, so that no man might make his son or his daughter pass through the fire for Molech.
11 And he removed the horses which the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun, at the entrance of the house of the LORD, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the officer, which was in the precincts; and he burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
12 And the altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of the LORD, the king broke down, and he smashed them there and threw their dust into the brook Kidron.
13 The king defiled the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right of the Mount of Destruction, which Solomon king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for Milcom the abomination of the sons of Ammon.
14 He broke in pieces the pillars and cut down the Asherim, and filled their places with human bones.


15 Moreover, the altar that was at Bethel, the high place which Jeroboam son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke down; and he burned the high place, crushed it to dust, and burned the Asherah.
16 Then Josiah turned and saw the graves that were there on the mountain, and he sent and took the bones from the graves and burned them on the altar, and defiled it according to the word of the LORD which the man of God proclaimed, who had foretold these things.
17 Then he said, “What is this monument that I see?” And the men of the city told him, “It is the grave of the man of God who came from Judah and proclaimed these things which you have done against the altar of Bethel.”
18 And he said, “Let him be; let no man disturb his bones.” So they left his bones undisturbed, with the bones of the prophet who came from Samaria.


19 Josiah also removed all the houses of the high places which were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke the LORD to anger; and he did to them according to all the deeds which he had done in Bethel.
20 And he slaughtered all the priests of the high places who were there on the altars, and burned human bones on them; then he returned to Jerusalem.


21 The king commanded all the people, saying, “Keep the Passover to the LORD your God as it is written in this Book of the Covenant.”
22 For such a Passover had not been kept from the days of the judges who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel and the kings of Judah.
23 But in the eighteenth year of King Josiah this Passover was kept to the LORD in Jerusalem.


24 Moreover, Josiah removed the mediums and the spiritists and the household gods and the idols and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might establish the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of the LORD.
25 And before him there was no king like him who turned to the LORD with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; nor did any like him arise after him.


26 Nevertheless, the LORD did not turn from the fierceness of his great wrath with which his anger burned against Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh had provoked him.
27 And the LORD said, “I will also remove Judah from my presence as I have removed Israel, and I will reject this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I said, ‘My name shall be there.’”


28 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
29 In his days Pharaoh Neco king of Egypt went up to the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates, and King Josiah went to meet him; but Neco killed him at Megiddo when he saw him.
30 And his servants carried him dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem and buried him in his own tomb. Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and anointed him, and made him king in his father’s place.


31 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
32 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.
33 Pharaoh Neco imprisoned him at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem, and imposed on the land a fine of one hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
34 And Pharaoh Neco made Eliakim son of Josiah king in the place of Josiah his father, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. But he took Jehoahaz away and brought him to Egypt, and he died there.
35 So Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh, but he taxed the land to give the money according to Pharaoh’s command. He exacted the silver and the gold from the people of the land, each according to his assessment, to give it to Pharaoh Neco.


36 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and his mother’s name was Zebidah, the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
37 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his fathers had done.




Chapter 24


1 In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant for three years; then he turned and rebelled against him.


2 The LORD sent against him bands of Chaldeans, bands of Arameans, bands of Moabites, and bands of Ammonites; He sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of the LORD that He spoke by His servants the prophets.


3 Surely this happened to Judah at the command of the LORD, to remove them out of His sight because of the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he had done,
4 and also for the innocent blood that he had shed, for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, and the LORD was not willing to forgive.


5 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the Book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah?
6 So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place.


7 The king of Egypt did not come out of his land again, for the king of Babylon had taken all that belonged to the king of Egypt from the brook of Egypt to the river Euphrates.


8 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Nehushta, the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
9 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that his father had done.


10 At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon went up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.
11 Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it,
12 and Jehoiachin king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officials; and the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.


13 He carried out from there all the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house, and cut in pieces all the gold vessels which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of the LORD, as the LORD had said.
14 He carried away all Jerusalem, all the princes, and all the mighty men of valor, ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths; none remained except the poorest of the people of the land.
15 He carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, and the king’s mother, the king’s wives, his officials, and the leading men of the land he took into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.
16 All the men of might, seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the smiths, one thousand, all strong and fit for war, the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.


17 The king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin’s uncle, king in his place, and changed his name to Zedekiah.


18 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal, the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
19 He did what was evil in the sight of the LORD, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
20 For because of the anger of the LORD, this came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah until He cast them out of His presence. Then Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.




Chapter 25


1 In the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and they camped against it and built a siege wall all around it.
2 So the city was besieged until the eleventh year of King Zedekiah.
3 On the ninth day of the fourth month, the famine was so severe in the city that there was no food for the people of the land.


4 Then the city was broken into, and all the men of war fled by night by way of the gate between the two walls, beside the king’s garden, though the Chaldeans were surrounding the city; and the king went by the way of the Arabah.
5 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king, and they overtook him in the plains of Jericho, and all his army was scattered from him.
6 Then they seized the king and brought him up to the king of Babylon at Riblah, and they passed sentence upon him.
7 They slaughtered the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, then put out the eyes of Zedekiah, bound him with bronze shackles, and brought him to Babylon.


8 In the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month (that was the nineteenth year of King Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon), Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem.
9 He burned the house of the LORD, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem; every great house he burned with fire.
10 And all the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls around Jerusalem.


11 Then Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, carried away the rest of the people who were left in the city, the deserters who had deserted to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the population.
12 But the captain of the guard left some of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and farmers.


13 The bronze pillars that were in the house of the LORD, and the stands and the bronze sea that were in the house of the LORD, the Chaldeans broke in pieces and carried the bronze to Babylon.
14 They took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the ladles, and all the bronze vessels used in the temple service.
15 The captain of the guard took away the firepans and the basins, whatever was of pure gold or of silver.
16 The two pillars, the one sea, and the stands that Solomon had made for the house of the LORD—the bronze of all these vessels was beyond weighing.
17 The height of one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a bronze capital was on it; the height of the capital was three cubits, with a network and pomegranates all around, all of bronze. And the second pillar was like these, with the network.


18 The captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold.
19 From the city he took one officer who was in charge of the men of war, five men of those who saw the king’s face, who were found in the city, the scribe of the captain of the host who mustered the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the city.
20 Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them and brought them to the king of Babylon at Riblah.
21 The king of Babylon struck them down and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah went into exile from its land.


22 Now as for the people who were left in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, he appointed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, over them.
23 When all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had appointed Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah at Mizpah—namely Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, Johanan the son of Kareah, Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite—they and their men.
24 Gedaliah swore to them and to their men, saying, “Do not be afraid of the servants of the Chaldeans. Remain in the land, serve the king of Babylon, and it will go well with you.”


25 But in the seventh month, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of royal descent, came with ten men and struck down Gedaliah, and he died, along with the Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah.
26 Then all the people, small and great, and the captains of the forces, arose and went to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.


27 In the thirty-seventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he became king, released Jehoiachin king of Judah from prison.
28 He spoke kindly to him and set his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon.
29 He changed his prison clothes, and he ate regularly in the king’s presence all the days of his life.
30 For his allowance, a regular portion was given him by the king, a daily amount, all the days of his life.