First Chronicles


Chapter 1


1 Adam, Seth, Enosh;
2 Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared;
3 Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech;
4 Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.


5 The sons of Japheth: Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras.
6 The sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, Diphath, and Togarmah.
7 The sons of Javan: Elishah, Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim.


8 The sons of Ham: Cush, Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
9 The sons of Cush: Seba, Havilah, Sabta, Raama, and Sabteca. The sons of Raama: Sheba and Dedan.
10 Cush fathered Nimrod. He was the first on earth to be a mighty man.


11 Mizraim fathered the Ludim, the Anamim, the Lehabim, the Naphtuhim,
12 the Pathrusim, the Casluhim (from whom the Philistines came), and the Caphtorim.


13 Canaan fathered Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
14 and the Jebusites, the Amorites, the Girgashites,
15 the Hivites, the Arkites, the Sinites,
16 the Arvadites, the Zemarites, and the Hamathites.


17 The sons of Shem: Elam, Asshur, Arpachshad, Lud, and Aram; and the sons of Aram: Uz, Hul, Gether, and Meshech.
18 Arpachshad fathered Shelah, and Shelah fathered Eber.
19 To Eber were born two sons: the name of one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided, and his brother’s name was Joktan.
20 Joktan fathered Almodad, Sheleph, Hazarmaveth, Jerah,
21 Hadoram, Uzal, Diklah,
22 Obal, Abimael, Sheba,
23 Ophir, Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.


24 Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah;
25 Eber, Peleg, Reu;
26 Serug, Nahor, Terah;
27 Abram, that is, Abraham.


28 The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.
29 These are their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; then Kedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
30 Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad, Tema,
31 Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.


32 The sons of Keturah, Abraham’s concubine: she bore Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. The sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.
33 The sons of Midian: Ephah, Epher, Hanoch, Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the descendants of Keturah.


34 Abraham fathered Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.


35 The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, Jeush, Jalam, and Korah.
36 The sons of Eliphaz: Teman, Omar, Zephi, Gatam, Kenaz, and by Timna, Amalek.
37 The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.


38 The sons of Seir: Lotan, Shobal, Zibeon, Anah, Dishon, Ezer, and Dishan.
39 The sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam; and Lotan’s sister was Timna.
40 The sons of Shobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Shephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aiah and Anah.
41 The son of Anah: Dishon. The sons of Dishon: Hamran, Eshban, Ithran, and Cheran.
42 The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, Zaavan, and Jaakan. The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.


43 These are the kings who reigned in the land of Edom before any king reigned over the sons of Israel: Bela the son of Beor, the name of his city was Dinhabah.
44 When Bela died, Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his place.
45 When Jobab died, Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his place.
46 When Husham died, Hadad the son of Bedad, who defeated Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his place. The name of his city was Avith.
47 When Hadad died, Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his place.
48 When Samlah died, Shaul of Rehoboth on the Euphrates reigned in his place.
49 When Shaul died, Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his place.
50 When Baal-hanan died, Hadad reigned in his place. The name of his city was Pai, and his wife’s name was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab.
51 And Hadad died.


The chiefs of Edom were: chiefs Timna, Aliah, Jetheth,
52 Oholibamah, Elah, Pinon,
53 Kenaz, Teman, Mibzar,
54 Magdiel, and Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom.




Chapter 2


1 These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah; Issachar and Zebulun;
2 Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin; Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.


3 The sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Shelah; these three were born to him by Bath-shua the Canaanitess. Er, Judah’s firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD, and He put him to death.
4 Tamar his daughter-in-law bore him Perez and Zerah. Judah had five sons in all.
5 The sons of Perez: Hezron and Hamul.
6 The sons of Zerah: Zimri, Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara—five in all.
7 The son of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who broke faith in the matter of the devoted thing.
8 The son of Ethan: Azariah.


9 The sons of Hezron who were born to him: Jerahmeel, Ram, and Chelubai.
10 Ram fathered Amminadab, and Amminadab fathered Nahshon, leader of the sons of Judah.
11 Nahshon fathered Salma, and Salma fathered Boaz.
12 Boaz fathered Obed, and Obed fathered Jesse.
13 Jesse fathered Eliab his firstborn, Abinadab the second, Shimea the third,
14 Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
15 Ozem the sixth, David the seventh.
16 And their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. The sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, Joab, and Asahel—three.
17 Abigail bore Amasa, and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.


18 Caleb the son of Hezron fathered children by Azubah his wife and by Jerioth; and these were her sons: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon.
19 When Azubah died, Caleb married Ephrath, and she bore him Hur.
20 Hur fathered Uri, and Uri fathered Bezalel.


21 Afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he married when he was sixty years old, and she bore him Segub.
22 Segub fathered Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.
23 But Geshur and Aram took from them Havvoth-jair, Kenath and its villages, sixty towns. All these were the descendants of Machir the father of Gilead.
24 After the death of Hezron in Caleb-ephrathah, Abijah, the wife of Hezron, bore him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.


25 The sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron: Ram his firstborn, Bunah, Oren, Ozem, and Ahijah.
26 Jerahmeel also had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
27 The sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel: Maaz, Jamin, and Eker.
28 The sons of Onam: Shammai and Jada. The sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
29 The name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bore him Ahban and Molid.
30 The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; and Seled died childless.
31 The son of Appaim: Ishi. The son of Ishi: Sheshan. The son of Sheshan: Ahlai.
32 The sons of Jada the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan; and Jether died childless.
33 The sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the descendants of Jerahmeel.


34 Now Sheshan had no sons, only daughters. Sheshan had an Egyptian servant whose name was Jarha.
35 So Sheshan gave his daughter in marriage to Jarha his servant, and she bore him Attai.
36 Attai fathered Nathan, and Nathan fathered Zabad.
37 Zabad fathered Ephlal, and Ephlal fathered Obed.
38 Obed fathered Jehu, and Jehu fathered Azariah.
39 Azariah fathered Helez, and Helez fathered Eleasah.
40 Eleasah fathered Sismai, and Sismai fathered Shallum.
41 Shallum fathered Jekamiah, and Jekamiah fathered Elishama.


42 The sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel: Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.
43 The sons of Hebron: Korah, Tappuah, Rekem, and Shema.
44 Shema fathered Raham, the father of Jorkeam; and Rekem fathered Shammai.
45 The son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.


46 Ephah, Caleb’s concubine, bore Haran, Moza, and Gazez; and Haran fathered Gazez.
47 The sons of Jahdai: Regem, Jotham, Geshan, Pelet, Ephah, and Shaaph.
48 Maacah, Caleb’s concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
49 She also bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbenah and the father of Gibea; and the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.


50 These were the sons of Caleb: the sons of Hur the firstborn of Ephrathah: Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim,
51 Salma the father of Bethlehem, and Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
52 Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, half of the Menuhoth.
53 The clans of Kiriath-jearim: the Ithrites, the Puthites, the Shumathites, and the Mishraites. From these came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.


54 The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-Joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.
55 The clans of the scribes who lived at Jabez: the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, and the Sucathites. These were the Kenites who came from Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.




Chapter 3


1 These were the sons of David who were born to him in Hebron: the firstborn was Amnon, by Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, Daniel, by Abigail the Carmelitess;
2 the third, Absalom the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
3 the fifth, Shephatiah, by Abital; the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah his wife.
4 Six were born to him in Hebron, and he reigned there seven years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years.


5 These were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon—four by Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel;
6 and Ibhar, Elishama, Eliphelet,
7 Nogah, Nepheg, Japhia,
8 Elishama, Eliada, and Eliphelet—nine in all.
9 All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines; and Tamar was their sister.


10 The son of Solomon was Rehoboam. Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
11 Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
12 Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
13 Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
14 Amon his son, Josiah his son.
15 The sons of Josiah: Johanan the firstborn, Jehoiakim the second, Zedekiah the third, Shallum the fourth.


16 The sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
17 The sons of Jeconiah, the captive: Shealtiel his son,
18 and Malchiram, Pedaiah, Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
19 The sons of Pedaiah: Zerubbabel and Shimei. And the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister;
20 and Hashubah, Ohel, Berechiah, Hasadiah, and Jushab-hesed—five.


21 The sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah.
22 The sons of Shecaniah: Shemaiah. And the sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, Igal, Bariah, Neariah, and Shaphat—six.
23 The sons of Neariah: Elioenai, Hizkiah, and Azrikam—three.
24 The sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, Eliashib, Pelaiah, Akkub, Johanan, Delaiah, and Anani—seven.




Chapter 4


1 The sons of Judah: Perez, Hezron, Carmi, Hur, and Shobal.
2 Reaiah the son of Shobal fathered Jahath, and Jahath fathered Ahumai and Lahad. These were the clans of the Zorathites.


3 These were the sons of Etam: Jezreel, Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi,
4 and Penuel was the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These were the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah, the father of Bethlehem.


5 Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
6 Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, Hepher, Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
7 The sons of Helah: Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan.
8 Koz fathered Anub, Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.


9 Jabez was more honorable than his brothers. His mother called his name Jabez, saying, “Because I bore him in pain.”
10 Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, “Oh that You would bless me indeed and enlarge my border, and that Your hand might be with me, and that You would keep me from harm so that it might not hurt me!” And God granted what he asked.


11 Chelub the brother of Shuhah fathered Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
12 Eshton fathered Beth-rapha, Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah.


13 The sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah. The sons of Othniel: Hathath.
14 Meonothai fathered Ophrah, and Seraiah fathered Joab the father of Ge-harashim, for they were craftsmen.


15 The sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and the son of Elah: Kenaz.
16 The sons of Jehallelel: Ziph, Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.


17 The sons of Ezrah: Jether, Mered, Epher, and Jalon. And she conceived Miriam, Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
18 His Judean wife bore Jered the father of Gedor, Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. These are the sons of Bithiah, the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took.


19 The sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham: the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
20 The sons of Shimon: Amnon, Rinnah, Ben-hanan, and Tilon. The sons of Ishi: Zoheth and Ben-zoheth.


21 The sons of Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lecah, Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of linen workers at Beth-ashbea;
22 and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash and Saraph, who ruled in Moab and returned to Lehem (now the records are ancient).
23 These were the potters and inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah; they lived there with the king in his work.


24 The sons of Simeon: Nemuel, Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, and Shaul;
25 Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
26 The sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.
27 Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters; but his brothers did not have many children, nor did all their clan multiply like the sons of Judah.


28 They lived at Beersheba, Moladah, Hazar-shual,
29 Bilhah, Ezem, Tolad,
30 Bethuel, Hormah, Ziklag,
31 Beth-marcaboth, Hazar-susim, Beth-biri, and Shaaraim. These were their cities until David reigned.
32 And their villages were Etam, Ain, Rimmon, Tochen, and Ashan—five cities,
33 along with all their villages that were around these cities as far as Baal. These were their settlements, and they have their genealogy.


34 Meshobab, Jamlech, Joshah the son of Amaziah,
35 Joel, Jehu the son of Joshibiah, son of Seraiah, son of Asiel,
36 Elioenai, Jaakobah, Jeshohaiah, Asaiah, Adiel, Jesimiel, Benaiah,
37 and Ziza the son of Shiphi, son of Allon, son of Jedaiah, son of Shimri, son of Shemaiah—
38 these mentioned by name were leaders in their clans, and their fathers’ houses increased greatly.
39 They journeyed to the entrance of Gedor, to the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks,
40 and they found rich and good pasture, and the land was very broad, quiet, and peaceful; for the former inhabitants there belonged to Ham.


41 These, recorded by name, came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and struck down their tents and the Meunites who were found there, and they devoted them to destruction to this day, and settled in their place, because there was pasture there for their flocks.
42 And some of them, five hundred men of the sons of Simeon, went to Mount Seir, with Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, as their leaders.
43 They struck down the remnant of the Amalekites who had escaped, and they have lived there to this day.




Chapter 5


1 The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel, for he was the firstborn, but because he defiled his father’s couch, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, so that he is not enrolled in the genealogy according to the birthright.


2 Though Judah became strong among his brothers and a prince came from him, yet the birthright belonged to Joseph.


3 the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.


4 The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
5 Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
6 and Beerah his son, whom Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria carried into exile. He was a chief of the Reubenites.


7 And his kinsmen by their clans, when the genealogy of their generations was recorded: Jeiel the chief, and Zechariah,
8 and Bela the son of Azaz, son of Shema, son of Joel, who lived in Aroer, as far as Nebo and Baal-meon.
9 He also lived to the east as far as the entrance of the wilderness from the Euphrates River, because their livestock had multiplied in the land of Gilead.


10 In the days of Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell into their hand. And they lived in their tents throughout all the region east of Gilead.


11 The sons of Gad lived next to them in the land of Bashan as far as Salecah:
12 Joel was the chief, Shapham the second, Janai and Shaphat in Bashan.
13 And their kinsmen according to their fathers’ houses: Michael, Meshullam, Sheba, Jorai, Jacan, Zia, and Eber, seven.


14 These were the sons of Abihail the son of Huri, son of Jaroah, son of Gilead, son of Michael, son of Jeshishai, son of Jahdo, son of Buz.
15 Ahi the son of Abdiel, son of Guni, was chief in their fathers’ house.
16 They lived in Gilead, in Bashan and in its towns, and in all the pasturelands of Sharon to their limits.


17 All of these were recorded in genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.


18 The sons of Reuben, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh—valiant men, men who carried shield and sword, who drew the bow, and who were trained for war—44,760, able to go out to war.
19 They made war against the Hagrites, Jetur, Naphish, and Nodab.
20 They received help against them, and the Hagrites and all who were with them were given into their hand, for they cried out to God in the battle, and He answered them, because they trusted in Him.
21 They captured their livestock: fifty thousand camels, two hundred fifty thousand sheep, two thousand donkeys, and one hundred thousand men alive.
22 For many fell slain, because the war was of God. And they lived in their place until the exile.


23 The sons of the half-tribe of Manasseh lived in the land. They increased from Bashan to Baal-hermon, Senir, and Mount Hermon.
24 These were the heads of their fathers’ houses: Epher, Ishi, Eliel, Azriel, Jeremiah, Hodaviah, and Jahdiel—mighty warriors, men of renown, heads of their fathers’ houses.


25 But they broke faith with the God of their fathers and whored after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them.
26 So the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, the spirit of Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and he carried them away—namely, the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh—and brought them to Halah, Habor, Hara, and the river Gozan, to this day.




Chapter 6


1 The sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.


2 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
3 The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.


4 Eleazar fathered Phinehas, Phinehas fathered Abishua,
5 Abishua fathered Bukki, Bukki fathered Uzzi,
6 Uzzi fathered Zerahiah, Zerahiah fathered Meraioth,
7 Meraioth fathered Amariah, Amariah fathered Ahitub,
8 Ahitub fathered Zadok, Zadok fathered Ahimaaz,
9 Ahimaaz fathered Azariah, Azariah fathered Johanan,
10 and Johanan fathered Azariah (it was he who served as priest in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem),
11 Azariah fathered Amariah, Amariah fathered Ahitub,
12 Ahitub fathered Zadok, Zadok fathered Shallum,
13 Shallum fathered Hilkiah, Hilkiah fathered Azariah,
14 Azariah fathered Seraiah, and Seraiah fathered Jehozadak.
15 Jehozadak went into exile when the LORD sent Judah and Jerusalem into exile by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.


16 The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.


17 These are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
18 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
19 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the clans of the Levites according to their fathers:


20 Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
21 Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.
22 The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
23 Elkanah his son, Ebiasaph his son, Assir his son,
24 Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, Shaul his son.
25 The sons of Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth,
26 Elkanah his son, Zophai his son, Nahath his son,
27 Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.


28 The sons of Samuel: Joel the firstborn, Abijah the second.


29 The sons of Merari: Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
30 Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.


31 These are the men whom David appointed over the service of song in the house of the LORD after the ark rested there.
32 They ministered with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon built the house of the LORD in Jerusalem, and they served in their office according to their order.


33 These are the men who served and their sons. Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, son of Samuel,
34 son of Elkanah, son of Jeroham, son of Eliel, son of Toah,
35 son of Zuph, son of Elkanah, son of Mahath, son of Amasai,
36 son of Elkanah, son of Joel, son of Azariah, son of Zephaniah,
37 son of Tahath, son of Assir, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah,
38 son of Izhar, son of Kohath, son of Levi, son of Israel.


39 His brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, was Asaph the son of Berechiah, son of Shimea,
40 son of Michael, son of Baaseiah, son of Malchijah,
41 son of Ethni, son of Zerah, son of Adaiah,
42 son of Ethan, son of Zimmah, son of Shimei,
43 son of Jahath, son of Gershom, son of Levi.


44 On the left hand were their kinsmen, the sons of Merari: Ethan the son of Kishi, son of Abdi, son of Malluch,
45 son of Hashabiah, son of Amaziah, son of Hilkiah,
46 son of Amzi, son of Bani, son of Shemer,
47 son of Mahli, son of Mushi, son of Merari, son of Levi.


48 And their kinsmen the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.


49 But Aaron and his sons made offerings on the altar of burnt offering and on the altar of incense for all the work of the Most Holy Place, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.


50 These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,
51 Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
52 Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
53 Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.


54 These are their dwelling places according to their settlements within their borders: to the sons of Aaron of the clans of the Kohathites, for theirs was the first lot,
55 they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah and its surrounding pasturelands.
56 But the fields of the city and its villages they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
57 To the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge: Hebron, Libnah with its pasturelands, Jattir, Eshtemoa with its pasturelands,
58 Hilen with its pasturelands, Debir with its pasturelands,
59 Ashan with its pasturelands, and Beth-shemesh with its pasturelands.


60 From the tribe of Benjamin, Geba, Alemeth, and Anathoth with their pasturelands; thirteen cities in all.


61 To the rest of the Kohathites were given by lot, out of the clan of the tribe, from the half-tribe, half of Manasseh, ten cities.
62 To the Gershomites, according to their clans, thirteen cities were allotted from the tribes of Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Manasseh in Bashan.
63 To the Merarites, according to their clans, twelve cities were allotted from the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Zebulun.
64 So the people of Israel gave the Levites the cities with their pasturelands.


65 They gave by lot from the tribe of the sons of Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin these cities that are mentioned by name.


66 And some of the clans of the sons of Kohath had cities of their territory from the tribe of Ephraim.
67 They were given the cities of refuge: Shechem with its pasturelands in the hill country of Ephraim, Gezer with its pasturelands,
68 Jokmeam with its pasturelands, Beth-horon with its pasturelands,
69 Aijalon with its pasturelands, Gath-rimmon with its pasturelands;
70 and from the half-tribe of Manasseh: Aner with its pasturelands, Bileam with its pasturelands, for the rest of the clans of the sons of Kohath.


71 To the Gershomites: from the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its pasturelands and Ashtaroth with its pasturelands;
72 and from the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh with its pasturelands, Daberath with its pasturelands,
73 Ramoth with its pasturelands, and Anem with its pasturelands;
74 and from the tribe of Asher: Mashal with its pasturelands, Abdon with its pasturelands,
75 Hukok with its pasturelands, and Rehob with its pasturelands;
76 and from the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee with its pasturelands, Hammon with its pasturelands, and Kiriathaim with its pasturelands.


77 To the rest of the Merarites were given from the tribe of Zebulun: Rimmono with its pasturelands, Tabor with its pasturelands;
78 and beyond the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, from the tribe of Reuben: Bezer in the wilderness with its pasturelands, Jahzah with its pasturelands,
79 Kedemoth with its pasturelands, and Mephaath with its pasturelands;
80 and from the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead with its pasturelands, Mahanaim with its pasturelands,
81 Heshbon with its pasturelands, and Jazer with its pasturelands.




Chapter 7


1 The sons of Issachar: Tola, Puah, Jashub, and Shimron—four.
2 The sons of Tola: Uzzi, Rephaiah, Jeriel, Jahmai, Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valor in their generations; their number in the days of David was twenty-two thousand six hundred.
3 The son of Uzzi: Izrahiah. And the sons of Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah, Joel, and Isshiah—five, all of them chief men.
4 Along with them, by their generations, according to their fathers' houses, were thirty-six thousand troops for war, for they had many wives and sons.
5 Their kinsmen belonging to all the clans of Issachar were in all eighty-seven thousand mighty men of valor, enrolled by genealogy.


6 The sons of Benjamin: Bela, Becher, and Jediael—three.
7 The sons of Bela: Ezbon, Uzzi, Uzziel, Jerimoth, and Iri—five, heads of fathers’ houses, mighty men of valor; their enrollment by genealogy was twenty-two thousand thirty-four.
8 The sons of Becher: Zemirah, Joash, Eliezer, Elioenai, Omri, Jerimoth, Abijah, Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.
9 Their enrollment by genealogy, according to their generations, as heads of their fathers’ houses, mighty men of valor, was twenty thousand two hundred.
10 The son of Jediael: Bilhan. And the sons of Bilhan: Jeush, Benjamin, Ehud, Chenaanah, Zethan, Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
11 All these were the sons of Jediael, according to the heads of their fathers’ houses, mighty men of valor, seventeen thousand two hundred, fit to go out for war and battle.
12 And Shuppim and Huppim were the sons of Ir, Hushim the son of Aher.


13 The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, Guni, Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.


14 The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, whom his Aramean concubine bore; she bore Machir the father of Gilead.
15 Machir took a wife for Huppim and for Shuppim. The name of his sister was Maacah. And the name of the second was Zelophehad, and Zelophehad had daughters.
16 And Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name Peresh. The name of his brother was Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
17 The son of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, son of Manasseh.
18 And his sister Hammolecheth bore Ishhod, Abiezer, and Mahlah.
19 The sons of Shemida were Ahian, Shechem, Likhi, and Aniam.
20 The sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, Tahath his son, Eleadah his son, Tahath his son,
21 Zabad his son, Shuthelah his son, and Ezer and Elead, whom the men of Gath, who were born in the land, killed because they came down to raid their livestock.
22 And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brothers came to comfort him.
23 And he went in to his wife, and she conceived and bore a son, and he called his name Beriah, because disaster had befallen his house.
24 His daughter was Sheerah, who built both Lower and Upper Beth-horon, and Uzzen-sheerah.
25 Rephah was his son, Resheph his son, Telah his son, Tahan his son,
26 Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
27 Nun his son, Joshua his son.
28 Their possessions and settlements were Bethel and its towns, and to the east Naaran, and to the west Gezer and its towns, Shechem and its towns, and Ayyah and its towns;
29 also along the borders of the sons of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, Dor and its towns. In these lived the sons of Joseph the son of Israel.


30 The sons of Asher: Imnah, Ishvah, Ishvi, Beriah, and their sister Serah.
31 The sons of Beriah: Heber and Malchiel, who fathered Birzaith.
32 Heber fathered Japhlet, Shomer, Hotham, and their sister Shua.
33 The sons of Japhlet: Pasach, Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the sons of Japhlet.
34 The sons of Shemer his brother: Rohgah, Hubbah, and Aram.
35 The sons of Helem his brother: Zophah, Imna, Shelesh, and Amal.
36 The sons of Zophah: Suah, Harnepher, Shual, Beri, Imrah,
37 Bezer, Hod, Shamma, Shilshah, Ithran, and Beera.
38 The sons of Jether: Jephunneh, Pispa, and Ara.
39 The sons of Ulla: Arah, Hanniel, and Rizia.
40 All these were men of Asher, heads of fathers’ houses, choice mighty warriors, chief of the princes. Their enrollment by genealogy, for service in war, was twenty-six thousand men.




Chapter 8


1 And Benjamin became the father of Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, Aharah the third,
2 Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
3 And Bela had sons: Addar, Gera, Abihud,
4 Abishua, Naaman, Ahoah,
5 Gera, Shephuphan, and Huram.


6 And these are the sons of Ehud—these were the heads of fathers’ houses of the inhabitants of Geba, and they were carried into exile to Manahath:
7 Naaman, Ahijah, and Gera—that is, Heglam—who was the father of Uzza and Ahihud.


8 And Shaharaim fathered children in the country of Moab after he had sent away Hushim and Baara his wives.
9 By Hodesh his wife he fathered Jobab, Zibia, Mesha, Malcam,
10 Jeuz, Sachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers’ houses.
11 And by Hushim he fathered Abitub and Elpaal.


12 And the sons of Elpaal: Eber, Misham, and Shemed (who built Ono and Lod with its towns),
13 and Beriah and Shema (they were heads of fathers’ houses of the inhabitants of Aijalon, who drove away the inhabitants of Gath);
14 and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,
15 Zebadiah, Arad, Eder,
16 Michael, Ishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah.
17 Zebadiah, Meshullam, Hizki, Heber,
18 Ishmerai, Izliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal.


19 Jakim, Zichri, Zabdi,
20 Elienai, Zillethai, Eliel,
21 Adaiah, Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei.
22 Ishpan, Eber, Eliel,
23 Abdon, Zichri, Hanan,
24 Hananiah, Elam, Anthothijah,
25 Iphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak.


26 Shamsherai, Shehariah, Athaliah,
27 Jaareshiah, Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of Jeroham.
28 These were heads of fathers’ houses according to their generations, chief men; they lived in Jerusalem.


29 Now in Gibeon lived the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, and the name of his wife was Maacah,
30 and his firstborn son was Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Nadab,
31 Gedor, Ahio, and Zecher.
32 Mikloth fathered Shimeah. And they also lived with their relatives in Jerusalem opposite their kinsmen.


33 And Ner fathered Kish, and Kish fathered Saul, and Saul fathered Jonathan, Malchi-shua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
34 And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal, and Merib-baal fathered Micah.
35 And the sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tarea, and Ahaz.
36 And Ahaz fathered Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah fathered Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri fathered Moza.
37 Moza fathered Binea; Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
38 And Azel had six sons, and these were their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
39 And the sons of Eshek his brother: Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
40 And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valor, archers, and they had many sons and grandsons, 150. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.




Chapter 9


1 So all Israel was enrolled by genealogies, and behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel. And Judah was taken into exile to Babylon because of their unfaithfulness.
2 Now the first inhabitants who lived again in their possessions in their cities were Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the temple servants.


3 And in Jerusalem lived some of the sons of Judah, and of the sons of Benjamin, and of the sons of Ephraim and Manasseh:
4 Uthai the son of Ammihud, son of Omri, son of Imri, son of Bani, from the sons of Perez the son of Judah.
5 And from the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn and his sons.
6 And from the sons of Zerah: Jeuel and their kinsmen, 690.
7 And from the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, son of Hodaviah, son of Hassenuah,
8 and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, son of Reuel, son of Ibnijah.
9 And their kinsmen according to their generations, 956. All these were heads of fathers’ houses according to their ancestral houses.


10 And of the priests: Jedaiah, Jehoiarib, Jachin,
11 and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, son of Meshullam, son of Zadok, son of Meraioth, son of Ahitub, chief officer of the house of God;
12 and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, son of Pashhur, son of Malchijah, and Maasai the son of Adiel, son of Jahzerah, son of Meshullam, son of Meshillemith, son of Immer;
13 and their kinsmen, heads of their fathers’ houses, 1,760, mighty men for the work of the service of the house of God.


14 And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, son of Azrikam, son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;
15 and Bakbakkar, Heresh, Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, son of Zichri, son of Asaph;
16 and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, son of Galal, son of Jeduthun; and Berechiah the son of Asa, son of Elkanah, who lived in the villages of the Netophathites.


17 Now the gatekeepers were Shallum, Akkub, Talmon, Ahiman, and their kinsmen (Shallum was the chief),
18 who previously stood at the king’s gate on the east side. These were the gatekeepers for the camp of the sons of Levi.
19 And Shallum the son of Kore, son of Ebiasaph, son of Korah, and his kinsmen of his father’s house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent, as their fathers had been in charge of the camp of the LORD, keepers of the entrance.
20 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in time past, and the LORD was with him.
21 Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was gatekeeper at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
22 All these who were chosen as gatekeepers at the thresholds were 212. They were enrolled by genealogy in their villages. David and Samuel the seer had established them in their trusted office.
23 So they and their sons were in charge of the gates of the house of the LORD, that is, the house of the tent, as guards.
24 The gatekeepers were on the four sides, east, west, north, and south. ***
25 And their kinsmen in their villages were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them.
26 For the four chief gatekeepers, who were Levites, were entrusted to be over the chambers and the treasuries of the house of God.
27 And they spent the night around the house of God, for on them lay the duty of watching, and they had charge of opening it every morning.


28 And some of them had charge of the vessels of service, for they were required to count them when they were brought in and taken out.
29 Some of them were appointed over the furniture and over all the holy vessels, also over the fine flour, the wine, the oil, the frankincense, and the spices.
30 And some of the sons of the priests prepared the mixing of the spices.
31 And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, was entrusted with the work of making the flat cakes.
32 Also some of their kinsmen of the sons of the Kohathites had charge of the showbread, to prepare it every Sabbath.


33 Now these are the singers, heads of fathers’ houses of the Levites, who lived in the chambers of the temple free from other service, for they were on duty day and night.
34 These were heads of fathers’ houses of the Levites, according to their generations, leaders. These lived in Jerusalem.


35 In Gibeon lived the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, and the name of his wife was Maacah.
36 And his firstborn son was Abdon, then Zur, Kish, Baal, Ner, Nadab,
37 Gedor, Ahio, Zechariah, and Mikloth.
38 And Mikloth fathered Shimeam. And they also lived with their kinsmen in Jerusalem, opposite their kinsmen.
39 And Ner fathered Kish, and Kish fathered Saul, and Saul fathered Jonathan, Malchi-shua, Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
40 And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal, and Merib-baal fathered Micah.
41 The sons of Micah: Pithon, Melech, Tahrea, and Ahaz.
42 And Ahaz fathered Jarah, and Jarah fathered Alemeth, Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri fathered Moza.
43 Moza fathered Binea, and his son was Rephaiah, his son Eleasah, his son Azel.
44 Azel had six sons, and these are their names: Azrikam, Bocheru, Ishmael, Sheariah, Obadiah, and Hanan. These were the sons of Azel.




Chapter 10


1 Now the Philistines fought against Israel. And the men of Israel fled before the Philistines and fell slain on Mount Gilboa.
2 And the Philistines overtook Saul and his sons. And the Philistines struck down Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.
3 And the battle pressed hard against Saul. And the archers found him, and he was wounded by the archers.


4 Then Saul said to his armor-bearer, “Draw your sword and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me.” But his armor-bearer would not, for he was greatly afraid. Therefore Saul took his own sword and fell upon it.
5 And when his armor-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword and died.
6 Thus Saul died; he and his three sons and all his house died together.
7 And when all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that they had fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities and fled, and the Philistines came and lived in them.


8 And on the next day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his sons fallen on Mount Gilboa.
9 And they stripped him and took his head and his armor and sent messengers throughout the land of the Philistines to carry the good news to their idols and to the people.
10 And they put his armor in the temple of their gods and fastened his head in the temple of Dagon.


11 But when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
12 all the valiant men arose and took away the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons and brought them to Jabesh. And they buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh and fasted seven days.


13 So Saul died for his breach of faith. He broke faith with the LORD in that he did not keep the command of the LORD and also consulted a medium, seeking guidance,
14 and did not seek guidance from the LORD. Therefore he put him to death and turned the kingdom over to David the son of Jesse.




Chapter 11


1 Then all Israel gathered to David at Hebron and said, “Behold, we are your bone and your flesh.
2 In times past, even when Saul was king, it was you who led out and brought in Israel. And the LORD your God said to you, ‘You shall shepherd My people Israel, and you shall be ruler over My people Israel.’”
3 So all the elders of Israel came to the king at Hebron, and David made a covenant with them at Hebron before the LORD. And they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of the LORD by Samuel.
4 Then David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (that is, Jebus), and the Jebusites were the inhabitants of the land.
5 The inhabitants of Jebus said to David, “You shall not come in here.” Nevertheless, David captured the stronghold of Zion, which is now the city of David.
6 David said, “Whoever strikes the Jebusites first shall be chief and commander.” And Joab the son of Zeruiah went up first, so he became chief.
7 David lived in the stronghold; therefore they called it the city of David.
8 He built the city all around, from the Millo even to the surrounding area, and Joab restored the rest of the city.
9 David became greater and greater, for the LORD of hosts was with him.


10 Now these are the chiefs of David’s mighty men, who gave him strong support in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king according to the word of the LORD concerning Israel.
11 These are the numbers of the mighty men whom David had: Jashobeam son of Hachmoni, chief of the thirty; he wielded his spear against three hundred whom he killed at one time.
12 And after him was Eleazar son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men.
13 He was with David at Pas-dammim when the Philistines were gathered there for battle. There was a plot of ground full of barley, and the troops fled before the Philistines.
14 But they took their stand in the midst of the field and defended it, and struck down the Philistines, and the LORD saved them by a great deliverance.
15 Three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to David at the cave of Adullam, while the army of the Philistines was encamped in the Valley of Rephaim.
16 David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
17 David longed and said, “Oh that someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem that is by the gate!”
18 So the three broke through the camp of the Philistines and drew water from the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and carried it and brought it to David. But David would not drink it. He poured it out to the LORD
19 and said, “Far be it from me before my God that I should do this. Shall I drink the blood of these men who went at the risk of their lives? For at the risk of their lives they brought it.” Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.
20 Now Abishai, the brother of Joab, was chief of the thirty. He wielded his spear against three hundred and killed them and won a name beside the three.
21 He was more honored than the thirty and became their commander, but he did not attain to the three.
22 And Benaiah son of Jehoiada was a valiant man of Kabzeel, a doer of great deeds. He struck down two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and struck a lion in a pit on a day when snow had fallen.
23 And he struck down an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits tall. The Egyptian had in his hand a spear like a weaver’s beam, but Benaiah went down to him with a staff, and snatched the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand and killed him with his own spear.
24 These things Benaiah son of Jehoiada did, and won a name beside the three mighty men.
25 He was more honored than the thirty, but he did not attain to the three. And David set him over his bodyguard.
26 The mighty men of the armies were: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
27 Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
28 Ira son of Ikkesh of Tekoa, Abiezer of Anathoth,
29 Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
30 Maharai the Netophathite, Heled son of Baanah the Netophathite,
31 Ithai son of Ribai of Gibeah of the Benjaminites, Benaiah of Pirathon,
32 Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
33 Azmaveth of Baharum, Eliahba of Shaalbon,
34 the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan son of Shagee the Hararite,
35 Ahiam son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal son of Ur,
36 Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
37 Hezro of Carmel, Naarai son of Ezbai,
38 Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar son of Hagri,
39 Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, the armor-bearer of Joab son of Zeruiah,
40 Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
41 Uriah the Hittite, Zabad son of Ahlai,
42 Adina son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,
43 Hanan son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
44 Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
45 Jediael son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
46 Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai and Joshaviah the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
47 Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.




Chapter 12


1 Now these are the men who came to David at Ziklag, while he was still restricted because of Saul son of Kish; and they were among the mighty men, helpers in war.
2 They were armed with bows and could use both the right hand and the left to sling stones and shoot arrows from the bow; they were from the tribe of Benjamin, Saul’s brethren.
3 The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; also Jeziel and Pelet, sons of Azmaveth; Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite;
4 Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty and a leader over the thirty; Jeremiah, Jahaziel, Johanan, Jozabad the Gederathite;
5 Eluzai, Jerimoth, Bealiah, Shemariah, Shephatiah the Haruphite;
6 Elkanah, Isshiah, Azarel, Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites;
7 and Joelah and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.


8 From the Gadites there went over to David at the stronghold in the wilderness, mighty and valiant men, men trained for war, who could handle shield and spear. Their faces were like the faces of lions, and they were as swift as gazelles on the mountains.
9 Ezer was the chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,
10 Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
11 Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
12 Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
13 Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.
14 These of the sons of Gad were captains of the army; the least was equal to a hundred, and the greatest to a thousand.
15 These are the ones who crossed the Jordan in the first month when it was overflowing all its banks, and they put to flight all those in the valleys, to the east and to the west.


16 Some of the sons of Benjamin and Judah also came to David at the stronghold.
17 David went out to meet them and said to them, “If you have come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be united with you; but if to betray me to my adversaries, though my hands have done no wrong, may the God of our fathers look on it and judge.”
18 Then the Spirit clothed Amasai, chief of the thirty, and he said: “We are yours, David, and with you, son of Jesse! Peace, peace to you, and peace to your helpers, for your God helps you.” So David received them and made them captains of the troop.


19 Some from Manasseh joined David when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle, but they did not help them. For the rulers of the Philistines, after counsel, sent him away, saying, “He may desert to his master Saul at the cost of our heads.”
20 As he went to Ziklag, there defected to him from Manasseh: Adnah, Jozabad, Jediael, Michael, Jozabad, Elihu, and Zillethai, captains of thousands who belonged to Manasseh.
21 They helped David against the band of raiders, for they were all mighty men of valor and were commanders in the army.
22 For from day to day men came to David to help him, until there was a great army like the army of God.


23 Now these are the numbers of the armed men who came to David at Hebron to turn the kingdom of Saul over to him, according to the word of the LORD:
24 The sons of Judah who bore shield and spear were 6,800 armed for war.
25 From the sons of Simeon, mighty men of valor for war, 7,100.
26 From the sons of Levi, 4,600.
27 Jehoiada was the leader of the house of Aaron, and with him were 3,700,
28 and Zadok, a young man mighty in valor, and twenty-two captains from his father’s house.
29 From the sons of Benjamin, Saul’s kinsmen, 3,000; for until that time the majority of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul.
30 From the sons of Ephraim 20,800 mighty men of valor, famous men in their fathers’ houses.
31 From the half-tribe of Manasseh 18,000, who were designated by name to come and make David king.
32 From the sons of Issachar, men who understood the times, with knowledge of what Israel ought to do, their chiefs were 200, and all their kinsmen were at their command.
33 From Zebulun, those going out to battle, trained for war with all weapons of war, 50,000, ready to give undivided loyalty.
34 From Naphtali 1,000 captains, and with them 37,000 with shield and spear.
35 From the Danites, those arrayed for battle, 28,600.
36 From Asher, those going out to battle, trained for war, 40,000.
37 And from the other side of the Jordan, from the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all kinds of weapons for war, 120,000.


38 All these, men of war, who could draw up in battle formation, came to Hebron with a whole heart to make David king over all Israel. And all the rest of Israel were of one mind to make David king.
39 And they were there with David for three days, eating and drinking, for their kinsmen had prepared for them.
40 Also those who were near them, from as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought food on donkeys, camels, mules, and oxen—provisions of flour, cakes of figs, clusters of raisins, wine, oil, oxen, and sheep in abundance, for there was joy in Israel.




Chapter 13


1 David consulted with the commanders of the thousands and of the hundreds, with every leader.
2 And David said to all the assembly of Israel, “If it seems good to you, and if it is from the LORD our God, let us send word everywhere to our kinsmen who remain in all the land of Israel, and to the priests and Levites who are with them in their cities with pasturelands, that they may gather to us.
3 And let us bring back the ark of our God to us, for we did not seek it in the days of Saul.”
4 Then all the assembly agreed to do so, for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
5 So David assembled all Israel from Shihor of Egypt to the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.
6 And David went up with all Israel to Baalah, that is, to Kiriath-jearim, which belongs to Judah, to bring from there the ark of God, the LORD who is enthroned above the cherubim, where His name is called upon.


7 And they carried the ark of God on a new cart from the house of Abinadab, with Uzza and Ahio driving the cart.
8 David and all Israel were celebrating before God with all their might, and with songs and lyres and harps and tambourines and cymbals and trumpets.
9 But when they came to the threshing floor of Chidon, Uzza put out his hand to hold the ark, because the oxen had stumbled.
10 And the anger of the LORD burned against Uzza, and He struck him down because he had put his hand on the ark; and he died there before God.
11 Then David became upset because the LORD stuck down Uzza; and he called that place Perez-uzza to this day.


12 David was afraid of God that day, saying, “How can I bring the ark of God to me?”
13 So David did not bring the ark to himself into the city of David, but diverted it to the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
14 Thus the ark of God remained with the household of Obed-edom in his house three months; and the LORD blessed the household of Obed-edom and all that he had.




Chapter 14


1 And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, with cedar logs, and masons, and carpenters, to build a house for him.


2 And David knew that the LORD had established him as king over Israel, for his kingdom was highly exalted for the sake of His people Israel.
3 And David took more wives in Jerusalem, and David fathered more sons and daughters.
4 And these are the names of the children born to him in Jerusalem: Shammua, Shobab, Nathan, Solomon,
5 and Ibhar, Elishua, and Elpelet,
6 and Nogah, Nepheg, and Japhia,
7 and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphelet.


8 And when the Philistines heard that David had been anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it and went out before them.
9 Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the Valley of Rephaim.
10 Then David inquired of God, saying, “Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will You give them into my hand?” And the LORD said to him, “Go up, and I will give them into your hand.”
11 And they came up to Baal-perazim, and David struck them down there. And David said, “God has broken through my enemies by my hand like the breaking through of waters.” Therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
12 And they left their gods there; and David gave the order, and they were burned with fire.


13 And the Philistines again made a raid in the valley.
14 And David again inquired of God, and God said to him, “Do not go up after them. Turn around and come upon them opposite the balsam trees.
15 And when you hear the sound of marching in the tops of the balsam trees, then go out to battle, for God has gone out before you to strike the camp of the Philistines.”
16 And David did as God had commanded him, and they struck the camp of the Philistines from Gibeon to Gezer.


17 And the fame of David went out into all lands, and the LORD brought the fear of him upon all nations.




Chapter 15


1 And David built houses for himself in the city of David. And he prepared a place for the ark of God and pitched a tent for it.
2 Then David said, “No one should carry the ark of God but the Levites, for the LORD chose them to carry the ark of the LORD and to minister to Him forever.”
3 And David gathered all Israel to Jerusalem to bring up the ark of the LORD to the place he had prepared for it.
4 And David assembled the sons of Aaron and the Levites:
5 of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief and his brothers, one hundred twenty;
6 of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief and his brothers, two hundred twenty;
7 of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief and his brothers, one hundred thirty;
8 of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief and his brothers, two hundred;
9 of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief and his brothers, eighty;
10 of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief and his brothers, one hundred twelve.
11 And David summoned the priests Zadok and Abiathar, and the Levites: Uriel, Asaiah, Joel, Shemaiah, Eliel, and Amminadab,
12 and said to them, “You are the heads of the fathers’ houses of the Levites. Consecrate yourselves, you and your brothers, so that you may bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel, to the place I have prepared for it.
13 Because you did not carry it the first time, the LORD our God broke out against us, for we did not seek Him according to the ordinance.”


14 So the priests and the Levites consecrated themselves to bring up the ark of the LORD, the God of Israel.
15 And the sons of the Levites carried the ark of God on their shoulders with poles, as Moses had commanded according to the word of the LORD.
16 And David commanded the chiefs of the Levites to appoint their brothers as singers with instruments of song, lyres, harps, and cymbals, raising the voice with joy.
17 So the Levites appointed Heman son of Joel; and from his brothers, Asaph son of Berechiah; and from the sons of Merari their brothers, Ethan son of Kushaiah.1
18 And with them their brothers of the second rank: Zechariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattithiah, Eliphalehu, Mikneiah, and the gatekeepers Obed-edom and Jeiel.


19 The singers Heman, Asaph, and Ethan were to sound bronze cymbals.
20 And Zechariah, Aziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Unni, Eliab, Maaseiah, and Benaiah were to play lyres set to alamoth.
21 And Mattithiah, Eliphalehu, Mikneiah, Obed-edom, Jeiel, and Azaziah were to play harps tuned to the sheminith, to lead the singing.
22 And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites for the music, directed the music, for he was skillful.
23 And Berechiah and Elkanah were protecting the ark.
24 And the priests Shebaniah, Joshaphat, Nethanel, Amasai, Zechariah, Benaiah, and Eliezer were to blow the trumpets before the ark of God. And Obed-edom and Jehiah were protecting the ark.


25 So David, and the elders of Israel, and the commanders of thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD from the house of Obed-edom with rejoicing.
26 And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites who were carrying the ark of the covenant of the LORD, that they sacrificed seven bulls and seven rams.
27 And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, as were all the Levites who carried the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the leader of the music. David also wore a linen ephod.
28 So all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the LORD with shouting, and with the sound of horns, trumpets, cymbals, lyres and harps.
29 And it came to pass, when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out through the window and saw King David dancing and playing music, and she despised him in her heart.




Chapter 16


1 So they brought in the ark of God and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it, and they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before God.
2 When David had finished offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the LORD.
3 And he distributed to every man of Israel, both man and woman, a loaf of bread, a portion of meat, and a cake of raisins.


4 And he appointed some of the Levites as ministers before the ark of the LORD, to invoke, to give thanks, and to praise the LORD, the God of Israel:
5 Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, then Jeiel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattithiah, Eliab, Benaiah, Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with lyres and harps; and Asaph was to sound the cymbals,
6 and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests were to blow trumpets regularly before the ark of the covenant of God.


7 On that day David first appointed that thanksgiving be sung to the LORD by Asaph and his brothers.
8 Give thanks to the LORD; call upon His name;
make known His deeds among the nations.
9 Sing to Him, sing praises to Him;
speak of all His wondrous works.
10 Glory in His holy name;
let the heart of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
11 Seek the LORD and His strength;
seek His face continually.
12 Remember the wonders that He has done,
His miracles, and the judgments of His mouth,
13 O offspring of Israel His servant,
sons of Jacob, His chosen ones.
14 He is the LORD our God;
His judgments are in all the earth.
15 Remember His covenant forever,
the word that He commanded to a thousand generations,
16 the covenant that He made with Abraham,
and His oath to Isaac.
17 He confirmed it to Jacob as a statute,
to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
18 saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan,
as the portion of your inheritance.”
19 When you were few in number,
very few, and sojourners in it,
20 and they went about from nation to nation,
from one kingdom to another people,
21 He allowed no man to oppress them;
He rebuked kings on their account,
22 saying, “Do not touch My anointed ones,
and do My prophets no harm.”
23 Sing to the LORD, all the earth!
Proclaim His salvation from day to day.
24 Declare His glory among the nations,
His marvelous deeds among all the peoples.
25 For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
He is to be feared above all gods.
26 For all the gods of the peoples are idols,
but the LORD made the heavens.
27 Splendor and majesty are before Him;
strength and joy are in His place.
28 Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the peoples,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
29 Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name;
bring an offering, and come before Him!
Worship the LORD in the splendor of holiness.
30 Tremble before Him, all the earth;
indeed, the world is firmly established;
it will not be moved.
31 Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice;
and let them say among the nations, “The LORD reigns!”
32 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it;
let the field exult, and all that is in it.
33 Then the trees of the forest will sing for joy before the LORD,
for He is coming to judge the earth.
34 Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
for His lovingkindness endures forever.
35 And say, “Save us, O God of our salvation,
and gather and deliver us from the nations,
that we may give thanks to Your holy name,
and glory in Your praise.
36 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting.”
And all the people said, “Amen,” and praised the LORD.


37 So he left Asaph and his brothers there before the ark of the covenant of the LORD to minister regularly before the ark as each day required,
38 and also Obed-edom and his sixty-eight brothers; Obed-edom the son of Jeduthun and Hosah were to be gatekeepers.


39 And he left Zadok the priest and his brothers the priests before the tabernacle of the LORD at the high place that was at Gibeon,
40 to offer burnt offerings regularly on the altar of burnt offering morning and evening, according to all that is written in the law of the LORD that He commanded Israel.
41 And with them were Heman and Jeduthun and the rest who were chosen, who were designated by name, to give thanks to the LORD, for His lovingkindness endures forever.
42 And with them were Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those who should sound aloud, and with instruments for the songs of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were at the gate.
43 Then all the people departed, each to his house, and David returned to bless his household.




Chapter 17


1 Now it came about, when David lived in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, “Behold, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of the LORD is under curtains.”
2 Then Nathan said to David, “Do all that is in your heart, for God is with you.”
3 But it came about that same night that the word of God came to Nathan, saying,
4 “Go and say to My servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD: You shall not build Me a house in which to dwell.
5 For I have not dwelled in a house from the day I brought up Israel to this day, but I have gone from tent to tent and from one dwelling place to another.
6 In all places where I have walked with all Israel, have I spoken a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to shepherd My people, saying, “Why have you not built Me a house of cedar?”’
7 So now, this is what you will say to My servant David: ‘Thus says the LORD of hosts: I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, to be ruler over My people Israel.
8 And I have been with you wherever you have gone and have cut off all your enemies from before you; and I will make for you a name like the name of the great ones who are in the earth.
9 And I will appoint a place for My people Israel and will plant them, so that they may dwell in their own place and not be disturbed again, nor shall the wicked wear them down anymore as formerly,
10 even from the day that I commanded judges to be over My people Israel. And I will subdue all your enemies. Moreover, I declare to you that the LORD will build a house for you.
11 And it shall come about when your days are fulfilled to go to your fathers, that I will raise up your descendant after you, one of your own sons, and I will establish his kingdom.
12 He shall build a house for Me, and I will establish his throne forever.
13 I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to Me. I will not take away My lovingkindness from him, as I took it from him who was before you,
14 but I will establish him in My house and in My kingdom forever, and his throne shall be established forever.’”
15 According to all these words and according to all this vision, this is what Nathan spoke to David.


16 Then King David went in and sat before the LORD, and he said, “Who am I, O LORD God, and what is my house, that You have brought me this far?
17 And this was a small thing in Your eyes, O God, but You have spoken of Your servant’s house for a great while to come, and have regarded me according to the rank of a man of high degree, O LORD God.
18 What more can David still say to You for honoring Your servant? For You know Your servant.
19 O LORD, for the sake of Your servant and according to Your heart, You have done all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
20 O LORD, there is none like You, and there is no God besides You, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
21 And who is like Your people Israel, the one nation on the earth whom God went to redeem for Himself as a people, to make for Yourself a name by great and awesome deeds, by driving out nations from before Your people whom You redeemed from Egypt?
22 For You have made Your people Israel to be Your own people forever, and You, O LORD, have become their God.
23 So now, O LORD, let the word that You have spoken concerning Your servant and concerning his house be confirmed forever, and do as You have spoken.
24 And let Your name be established and magnified forever, saying, ‘The LORD of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel;’ and the house of David Your servant will be established before You.
25 For You, O my God, have revealed to Your servant that You will build a house for him; therefore Your servant has found courage to pray before You.
26 And now, O LORD, You are God, and You have promised this good thing to Your servant.
27 So now it has pleased You to bless the house of Your servant, that it may continue forever before You; for You, O LORD, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.”




Chapter 18


1 And after this, David defeated the Philistines and subdued them, and he took Gath and its surrounding villages out of Philistine control.
2 He also defeated Moab, and the Moabites became servants to David, bringing tribute.
3 David also struck Hadadezer king of Zobah at Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion at the Euphrates River.
4 And David captured from him a thousand chariots, seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand foot soldiers. Then David hamstrung all the chariot horses, but he kept enough of them for a hundred chariots.
5 And when the Arameans of Damascus came to help Hadadezer king of Zobah, David struck down twenty-two thousand men of the Arameans.
6 Then David put garrisons in Aram of Damascus, and the Arameans became servants to David, bringing tribute. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.


7 And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer and brought them to Jerusalem.
8 And from Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadadezer, David took a large amount of bronze. With it Solomon made the bronze sea and the pillars and the bronze vessels.


9 When Tou king of Hamath heard that David had struck down all the army of Hadadezer king of Zobah,
10 he sent Hadoram, his son, to King David to greet him and to bless him because he had fought against Hadadezer and struck him down—for Hadadezer had been at war with Tou. And with him he sent all kinds of articles of gold and silver and bronze.
11 These also King David dedicated to the LORD, along with the silver and gold that he carried off from all the nations: from Edom and Moab and the sons of Ammon and the Philistines and Amalek.


12 And Abishai son of Zeruiah struck down eighteen thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
13 And he put garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And the LORD gave victory to David wherever he went.


14 So David reigned over all Israel, and he administered justice and righteousness for all his people.
15 And Joab son of Zeruiah was over the army, and Jehoshaphat son of Ahilud was recorder.
16 And Zadok son of Ahitub and Abimelech son of Abiathar were priests, and Shavsha was scribe.
17 And Benaiah son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and the sons of David were chief officials at the king’s side.




Chapter 19


1 And it came to pass after this, that Nahash king of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his place.
2 And David said, “I will deal loyally with Hanun son of Nahash, because his father dealt loyally with me.” So David sent messengers to console him concerning his father. And the servants of David came to Hanun in the land of the sons of Ammon to console him.
3 But the princes of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun, “Do you think David is honoring your father, that he has sent comforters to you? Have not his servants come to you to search and to overthrow and to spy out the land?”
4 So Hanun took David’s servants and shaved them and cut off their garments in the middle at their hips and sent them away.
5 And some men went and told David about the men, and he went to meet them, for the men were greatly humiliated. And the king said, “Stay at Jericho until your beards grow back, then return.”


6 And when the sons of Ammon saw that they had made themselves repulsive to David, Hanun and the sons of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for themselves chariots and horsemen from Aram Naharaim, Aram Maacah, and Zobah.
7 And they hired thirty-two thousand chariots and the king of Maacah with his people, who came and camped before Medeba. And the sons of Ammon were gathered from their cities and came to battle.
8 And when David heard of it, he sent Joab and all the army of mighty men.
9 And the sons of Ammon came out and drew up for battle at the entrance of the city, and the kings who had come were by themselves in the open country.
10 And Joab saw that the battle line was against him both in front and behind. So he chose some of the best men of Israel and arrayed them against the Arameans.
11 And the rest of the men he put under the command of Abishai, his brother, and they arrayed themselves against the sons of Ammon.
12 And he said, “If the Arameans are too strong for me, then you shall help me, but if the sons of Ammon are too strong for you, then I will help you.
13 Be strong, and let us be courageous for our people and for the cities of our God, and may the LORD do what seems good in His eyes.”
14 So Joab and the people who were with him drew near to the battle against the Arameans, and they fled before him.
15 And when the sons of Ammon saw that the Arameans had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, his brother, and entered the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.
16 But when the Arameans saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they sent messengers and brought out the Arameans who were beyond the Euphrates, with Shophach the commander of the army of Hadadezer leading them.
17 And when it was told to David, he gathered all Israel and crossed the Jordan and came to them and drew up against them. And David set the battle in array against the Arameans, and they fought with him.
18 And the Arameans fled before Israel, and David killed seven thousand charioteers and forty thousand foot soldiers of the Arameans, and he also killed Shophach the commander of the army.
19 And when the servants of Hadadezer saw that they had been defeated by Israel, they made peace with David and became his servants. And the Arameans would not help the sons of Ammon anymore.




Chapter 20


1 And it came to pass, at the turn of the year, at the time when kings go out to war, Joab led out the army and ravaged the land of the Ammonites and came and besieged Rabbah. But David remained in Jerusalem. And Joab struck Rabbah and overthrew it.
2 And David took the crown of their king from his head, and he found it weighed a talent of gold, and it had a precious stone in it; and it was placed on David’s head. And he brought out a great amount of spoil from the city.
3 And he brought out the people who were in it and set them to labor with saws and iron picks and axes. Thus David did to all the cities of the Ammonites. Then David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.


4 And after this, war broke out with the Philistines at Gezer. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite struck down Sippai, who was of the descendants of the Rephaim, and they were subdued.
5 And there was again war with the Philistines, and Elhanan the son of Jair struck down Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver’s beam.
6 And again there was war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature who had six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot, twenty-four in number, and he also was descended from the Rephaim.
7 And when he taunted Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea, David’s brother, struck him down.
8 These were descended from the Rephaim in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David and by the hand of his servants.




Chapter 21


1 Then Satan stood up against Israel and incited David to number Israel.


2 And David said to Joab and to the commanders of the army, “Go, number Israel from Beersheba to Dan, and bring the report to me so I may know their number.”
3 And Joab said, “May the LORD add to His people a hundredfold as many as they are. Are they not all my lord the king’s servants? Why does my lord seek this thing? Why should it become guilt for Israel?”
4 But the word of the king prevailed against Joab. So Joab went out and traveled throughout all Israel, and he came to Jerusalem.
5 And Joab gave the total number of the people to David, and all Israel were one million one hundred thousand men drawing the sword, and Judah were four hundred seventy thousand men drawing the sword.
6 But he did not number Levi and Benjamin among them, because the king’s command was abhorrent to Joab.
7 And this thing was evil in the eyes of God, and He struck Israel.
8 Then David said to God, “I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing. But now, please take away the guilt of Your servant, for I have acted very foolishly.”
9 And the LORD spoke to Gad, David’s seer, saying,
10 “Go and speak to David, saying, ‘Thus says the LORD: I am laying three options before you; choose for yourself one of them, and I will do it to you.’”
11 So Gad came to David and said to him, “Thus says the LORD: Take for yourself
12 either three years of famine, or three months of being swept away before your adversaries while the sword of your enemies overtakes you, or three days of the sword of the LORD—pestilence in the land and the angel of the LORD causing destruction throughout all the territory of Israel. Now decide what word I shall return to Him who sent me.”
13 And David said to Gad, “I am in great distress. Let me fall into the hand of the LORD, for His mercies are very great, but do not let me fall into the hand of man.”


14 So the LORD sent a pestilence on Israel, and seventy thousand men of Israel fell.
15 And God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it, but as he was destroying, the LORD looked and relented concerning the evil, and He said to the destroying angel, “It is enough; now stay your hand.” And the angel of the LORD was standing by the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
16 And David lifted up his eyes and saw the angel of the LORD standing between earth and heaven, with his sword drawn in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, covered in sackcloth, fell on their faces.
17 And David said to God, “Was it not I who commanded to number the people? It is I who have sinned and done evil. But these sheep—what have they done? Please let Your hand, O LORD my God, be against me and against my father’s house, but not against Your people, to destroy them.”


18 Then the angel of the LORD commanded Gad to say to David that David should go up and erect an altar to the LORD on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
19 And David went up at the word of Gad, which he had spoken in the name of the LORD.
20 And Ornan turned and saw the angel, and his four sons who were with him hid themselves, while Ornan was threshing wheat.
21 And David came to Ornan, and Ornan looked and saw David, and he went out from the threshing floor and bowed down to David with his face to the ground.
22 And David said to Ornan, “Give me the site of the threshing floor, that I may build on it an altar to the LORD. Give it to me at full price, so the plague may be stopped from upon the people.”
23 And Ornan said to David, “Take it for yourself, and let my lord the king do what is good in his eyes. See, I give the oxen for burnt offerings, and the threshing sledges for the wood, and the wheat for the grain offering—I give it all.”
24 But King David said to Ornan, “No, but I will certainly buy it for full price, for I will not take what is yours for the LORD, nor will I offer a burnt offering that costs me nothing.”
25 So David gave Ornan six hundred shekels of gold by weight for the site
26 And David built there an altar to the LORD and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and he called on the LORD, and He answered him with fire from heaven on the altar of burnt offering.
27 And the LORD commanded the angel, and he returned his sword to its sheath.
28 At that time, when David saw that the LORD had answered him on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, he sacrificed there.
29 For the tabernacle of the LORD that Moses had made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering, were at that time on the high place at Gibeon.
30 But David could not go before it to seek God, because he was afraid of the sword of the angel of the LORD.




Chapter 22


1 Then David said, “This is the house of the LORD God, and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.”
2 And David commanded to gather the foreigners who were in the land of Israel, and he appointed stonecutters to hew out dressed stones to build the house of God.
3 And David prepared iron in abundance for nails for the doors of the gates and for clamps, and bronze in abundance beyond weighing,
4 and cedar logs without number, for the Sidonians and Tyrians brought cedar wood in abundance to David.


5 And David said, “Solomon my son is young and inexperienced, and the house that is to be built for the LORD must be exceedingly magnificent, famous and glorious throughout all lands. Therefore I will make preparation for it.” So David prepared abundantly before his death.
6 Then he called for Solomon his son and charged him to build a house for the LORD, the God of Israel.
7 And David said to Solomon, “My son, I had it in my heart to build a house for the name of the LORD my God
8 But the word of the LORD came to me, saying, ‘You have shed much blood and have waged great wars. You shall not build a house for my name, for you have shed much blood on the earth before me.
9 Behold, a son will be born to you. He shall be a man of rest, and I will give him rest from all his surrounding enemies. For his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quiet to Israel in his days.
10 He shall build a house for my name. He shall be a son to me, and I will be a father to him, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.’


11 Now, my son, may the LORD be with you, so that you may succeed in building the house of the LORD your God, as he has spoken concerning you.
12 Only may the LORD grant you insight and understanding and give you charge over Israel, so that you may keep the law of the LORD your God.
13 Then you will prosper if you are careful to observe the statutes and the ordinances that the LORD commanded Moses for Israel. Be strong and courageous. Do not fear and do not be dismayed.
14 Now behold, with great effort I have prepared for the house of the LORD one hundred thousand talents of gold, and one million talents of silver, and bronze and iron beyond weighing, for it is in abundance. I have also prepared timber and stone, and you may add to them.
15 Moreover, you have an abundance of workmen: stonecutters, masons, carpenters, and every kind of skilled craftsman in every kind of work.
16 Gold, silver, bronze, and iron—there is no limit. Arise and work! May the LORD be with you.”


17 Then David commanded all the leaders of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying,
18 “Is not the LORD your God with you? And has he not given you rest on every side? For he has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand, and the land has been subdued before the LORD and before his people.
19 Now set your heart and your soul to seek the LORD your God. Arise and build the sanctuary of the LORD God, so that the ark of the covenant of the LORD and the holy vessels of God may be brought into the house built for the name of the LORD.”




Chapter 23


1 When David was old and full of days, he made Solomon his son king over Israel.
2 He gathered together all the leaders of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.
3 The Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward, and their number, by headcount, was thirty-eight thousand men.
4 Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee the work of the house of the LORD, six thousand were officers and judges,
5 four thousand were gatekeepers, and four thousand were to praise the LORD with the instruments which David had made for giving praise.


6 David organized them in divisions according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
7 Of the Gershonites: Ladan and Shimei.
8 The sons of Ladan: Jehiel the chief, Zetham, and Joel—three.
9 The sons of Shimei: Shelomoth, Haziel, and Haran—three. These were the heads of the families of Ladan.
10 And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Zina, Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.
11 Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second. But Jeush and Beriah did not have many sons, so they were enrolled as a single family.
12 The sons of Kohath: Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel—four.
13 The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. Aaron was set apart to be consecrated as most holy, he and his sons forever, to burn incense before the LORD, to minister to him, and to bless in his name forever.
14 But the sons of Moses the man of God were named among the tribe of Levi.
15 The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
16 The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the chief.
17 The sons of Eliezer: Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very numerous.
18 The sons of Izhar: Shelomith the chief.
19 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
20 The sons of Uzziel: Micah the chief, and Isshiah the second.
21 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.
22 Eleazar died and had no sons, but only daughters, and their brothers, the sons of Kish, married them.
23 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jeremoth—three.
24 These were the sons of Levi by their fathers' houses, the heads of the fathers' houses, as they were counted individually by name, from twenty years old and upward, who served in the work of the house of the LORD.


25 For David said, “The LORD, the God of Israel, has given rest to his people, and he dwells in Jerusalem forever.
26 So the Levites no longer need to carry the tabernacle or any of its utensils for its service.”
27 For by the last words of David, the Levites were numbered from twenty years old and upward.
28 For their duty was to assist the sons of Aaron in the service of the house of the LORD, having charge of the courts and the chambers, the cleansing of all that is holy, and the work of the service of the house of God,
29 along with the showbread, the fine flour for the grain offering, the unleavened wafers, the baked offering, the offering mixed with oil, and all measures of quantity and size.
30 And they were to stand every morning to thank and praise the LORD, and likewise at evening,
31 and whenever burnt offerings were offered to the LORD on Sabbaths, new moons, and feast days, according to the number required by the regulation for them, continually before the LORD.
32 Thus they were to take care of the tent of meeting and the sanctuary and attend the sons of Aaron their brothers for the service of the house of the LORD.




Chapter 24


1 These were the divisions of the sons of Aaron. The sons of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
2 But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and they had no sons, so Eleazar and Ithamar served as priests.


3 David, with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their assigned duties in their service.
4 More chief men were found among the sons of Eleazar than among the sons of Ithamar, and they were divided accordingly. Sixteen heads of fathers’ houses from the sons of Eleazar, and eight from the sons of Ithamar.
5 They were divided by lot, one group with another, for there were officers of the sanctuary and officers of God among both the sons of Eleazar and the sons of Ithamar.
6 Shemaiah son of Nethanel, the scribe, one of the Levites, recorded them in the presence of the king, the princes, Zadok the priest, Ahimelech son of Abiathar, and the heads of the fathers’ houses of the priests and the Levites—one father's house taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.
7 The first lot fell to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
8 the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
9 the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
10 the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
11 the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
12 the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
13 the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
14 the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
15 the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
16 the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
17 the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
18 the twenty-third to Delaiah, the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
19 These were their appointments for their service, to come into the house of the LORD according to the arrangement made for them by Aaron their father, as the LORD, the God of Israel, had commanded him.


20 As for the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.
21 Of Rehabiah: of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.
22 Of the Izharites: Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
23 The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
24 The sons of Uzziel: Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir.
25 The brother of Micah was Isshiah; of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.
26 The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Jaaziah: Beno.
27 The sons of Merari: by Jaaziah—Beno, Shoham, Zaccur, and Ibri.
28 Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
29 Of Kish, the sons of Kish: Jerahmeel.
30 The sons of Mushi: Mahli, Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites, according to their fathers’ houses.
31 These likewise cast lots, just as their brothers the sons of Aaron did in the presence of King David, Zadok, Ahimelech, and the heads of the fathers’ houses of the priests and the Levites—the chief fathers just as the younger brothers.




Chapter 25


1 David and the commanders of the army set apart for service some of the sons of Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, who would prophesy with lyres, harps, and cymbals. The number of those who performed their service was:
2 From the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, Joseph, Nethaniah, and Asharelah, sons of Asaph under the hand of Asaph, who prophesied under the hand of the king.
3 From Jeduthun, the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, Zeri, Jeshaiah, Shimei, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hand of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with the harp, giving thanks and praising the LORD.
4 From Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, and Mahazioth.
5 All these were sons of Heman, the king’s seer, in the matters of God, to exalt him. God gave Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
6 All these were under the direction of their father in the music of the house of the LORD, with cymbals, harps, and lyres, for the service of the house of God, under the direction of the king: Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman.
7 And their number, with their brothers who were trained in singing to the LORD, all who were skillful, was two hundred eighty-eight.
8 They cast lots for their duties, small and great alike, teacher as well as student.


9 The first lot fell to Asaph to Joseph, the second to Gedaliah, he and his brothers and sons, twelve;
10 the third to Zaccur, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
11 the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
12 the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
13 the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
14 the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
15 the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
16 the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
17 the tenth to Shimei, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
18 the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
19 the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
20 the thirteenth to Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
21 the fourteenth to Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
22 the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
23 the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
24 the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
25 the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
26 the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
27 the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
28 the twenty-first to Hothir, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
29 the twenty-second to Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
30 the twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
31 the twenty-fourth to Romamti-ezer, his sons and his brothers, twelve.




Chapter 26


1 For the divisions of the gatekeepers: from the Korahites was Meshelemiah son of Kore, from the sons of Asaph.
2 Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
3 Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.
4 Obed-edom had sons: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, Sacar the fourth, Nethanel the fifth,
5 Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth—for God had blessed him.
6 To his son Shemaiah were born sons who ruled over their ancestral house, for they were men of ability.
7 The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, Rephael, Obed, and Elzabad, whose brothers Elihu and Semachiah were also capable men.
8 All these were of the sons of Obed-edom, they and their sons and their brothers, able men with strength for the service—sixty-two from Obed-edom.
9 Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, capable men, eighteen in all.
10 Also Hosah, from the sons of Merari, had sons: Shimri the chief—for though he was not the firstborn, his father appointed him chief—
11 Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hosah were thirteen.
12 These divisions of the gatekeepers, chief men, had duties like their brothers, to minister in the house of the LORD.
13 And they cast lots, small and great alike, according to their ancestral houses, for each gate.


14 The lot for the east fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a wise counselor, they cast lots, and his lot came out for the north.
15 For Obed-edom, the south; and for his sons, the storehouse.
16 For Shuppim and Hosah, the west, by the gate of Shallecheth, on the ascending highway—guard corresponding to guard.
17 On the east, six Levites; on the north, four per day; on the south, four per day; and at the storehouse, two by two.
18 At the Parbar to the west, four at the highway and two at the Parbar.
19 These were the divisions of the gatekeepers among the sons of the Korahites and the sons of Merari.


20 And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasuries of the house of God and over the treasuries of the dedicated gifts.
21 The sons of Ladan, the sons of the Gershonite belonging to Ladan, the heads of the ancestral houses belonging to Ladan the Gershonite: Jehieli.
22 The sons of Jehieli: Zetham and Joel his brother were over the treasuries of the house of the LORD.
23 From the Amramites, the Izharites, the Hebronites, and the Uzzielites—
24 Shebuel son of Gershom, son of Moses, was chief officer over the treasuries.
25 His brothers from Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, Jeshaiah his son, Joram his son, Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.
26 This Shelomith and his brothers were over all the treasuries of the dedicated gifts that King David and the heads of the ancestral houses and the commanders of the thousands and the hundreds and the officers of the army had dedicated.
27 From the spoil won in battles they dedicated these things to maintain the house of the LORD.
28 And all that Samuel the seer and Saul son of Kish and Abner son of Ner and Joab son of Zeruiah had dedicated—everything dedicated was under the care of Shelomith and his brothers.
29 From the Izharites: Chenaniah and his sons were assigned to external duties over Israel as officers and judges.
30 From the Hebronites: Hashabiah and his brothers, seventeen hundred capable men, had oversight over Israel west of the Jordan for all the work of the LORD and for the service of the king.
31 From the Hebronites: Jerijah was the chief of the Hebronites, according to their genealogies by ancestral houses. In the fortieth year of David’s reign they were sought out, and found among them were capable men at Jazer in Gilead.
32 His brothers, capable men, were two thousand seven hundred heads of ancestral houses. And King David appointed them over the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh for every matter of God and matter of the king.




Chapter 27


1 Now the sons of Israel, according to their number—the heads of fathers’ houses, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers who served the king in all matters of the divisions that came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year—each division was twenty-four thousand.
2 Over the first division for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
3 He was a descendant of Perez and was chief of all the commanders of the army for the first month.
4 Over the division of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his division, and Mikloth was the chief officer; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
5 The third commander of the army for the third month was Benaiah, son of Jehoiada the priest, as chief; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
6 This Benaiah was a mighty man of the thirty, and over the thirty; and Ammizabad his son was in charge of his division.
7 The fourth for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
8 The fifth for the fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
9 The sixth for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
10 The seventh for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
11 The eighth for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
12 The ninth for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjaminites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
13 The tenth for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
14 The eleventh for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the sons of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
15 The twelfth for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.


16 Over the tribes of Israel: of the Reubenites, Eliezer the son of Zichri was chief; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah;
17 of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok;
18 of Judah, Elihu, one of David’s brothers; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael;
19 of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel;
20 of the Ephraimites, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
21 of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner;
22 of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the leaders of the tribes of Israel.
23 But David did not count those twenty years old and under, because the LORD had said He would multiply Israel like the stars of the heavens.
24 Joab the son of Zeruiah had begun to count them, but he did not finish, and wrath came upon Israel for it; nor was the number entered in the account of the chronicles of King David.


25 Over the king’s treasuries was Azmaveth the son of Adiel; and over the treasuries in the country, in the cities, in the villages, and in the towers was Jonathan the son of Uzziah.
26 Over those who did the work of the field for tilling the soil was Ezri the son of Chelub.
27 Over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite; over the produce of the vineyards for the wine cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite.
28 Over the olive trees and the sycamore trees in the Shephelah was Baal-hanan the Gederite; over the stores of oil was Joash.
29 Over the herds that grazed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite; and over the herds in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai.
30 Over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite; and over the donkeys was Jehdeiah the Meronothite.
31 Over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite. All these were overseers of the property which belonged to King David.


32 Also Jonathan, David’s uncle, was a counselor, a man of understanding, and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni attended the king’s sons.
33 Ahithophel was the king’s counselor, and Hushai the Archite was the king’s friend.
34 After Ahithophel came Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar. Joab was commander of the king’s army.




Chapter 28


1 Then David assembled all the leaders of Israel—the leaders of the tribes, the commanders of the divisions that served the king, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and the stewards of all the property and livestock of the king and of his sons, with the officials and the mighty men, even all the valiant men—to Jerusalem.
2 Then King David rose to his feet and said, “Hear me, my brothers and my people. I had it in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of the LORD and for the footstool of our God, and I prepared materials for building.
3 But God said to me, ‘You shall not build a house for My name, because you are a man of war and have shed blood.’
4 Yet the LORD, the God of Israel, chose me from all my father’s house to be king over Israel forever. For He has chosen Judah as leader, and in the house of Judah, my father’s house, and among the sons of my father He took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel.
5 And of all my sons—for the LORD has given me many sons—He has chosen Solomon, my son, to sit on the throne of the kingdom of the LORD over Israel.
6 And He said to me, ‘Solomon your son is the one who shall build My house and My courts, for I have chosen him to be My son, and I will be his Father.
7 I will establish his kingdom forever, if he continues strong in keeping My commandments and My ordinances, as he is doing today.’


8 Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of the LORD, and in the hearing of our God: observe and seek out all the commandments of the LORD your God, so that you may possess this good land and leave it as an inheritance to your sons after you forever.
9 And you, Solomon my son, know the God of your father and serve Him with a whole heart and with a willing mind; for the LORD searches all hearts and understands every plan and thought. If you seek Him, He will be found by you; but if you forsake Him, He will cast you off forever.
10 Consider now, for the LORD has chosen you to build a house for the sanctuary; be strong and do it.”


11 Then David gave to Solomon his son the plan of the vestibule, its houses, its treasuries, its upper rooms, its inner rooms, and the room for the mercy seat;
12 and the plan of all that he had by the Spirit—for the courts of the house of the LORD, and all the surrounding rooms, for the treasuries of the house of God and for the treasuries of dedicated things;
13 also for the divisions of the priests and the Levites, and all the work of the service of the house of the LORD, and for all the vessels of service in the house of the LORD;
14 the weight of gold for all vessels of each kind of service, the weight for all silver vessels for each kind of service,
15 the weight of the golden lampstands and their lamps, the weight of gold for each lampstand and its lamps, and the weight of silver for the silver lampstands, for each lampstand and its lamps, according to the service of each lampstand;
16 the weight of gold for each table for the showbread, and the silver for the silver tables;
17 and pure gold for the forks, the basins, and the cups; for the golden bowls and their weight, for each bowl; and for the silver bowls, for each bowl;
18 and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight, and gold for the pattern of the chariot—the cherubim that spread out their wings and cover the ark of the covenant of the LORD.


19 “All this,” said David, “the LORD made me understand in writing, by His hand upon me, all the works of this plan.”
20 And David said to Solomon his son, “Be strong and courageous and do it. Do not be afraid or dismayed, for the LORD God, even my God, is with you. He will not leave you or forsake you until all the work for the service of the house of the LORD is finished.
21 And behold, the divisions of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of God are with you in every willing man who has skill for any kind of service. Also the officers and all the people will be wholly at your command.”




Chapter 29


1 Then King David said to all the assembly, “Solomon my son, whom alone God has chosen, is young and inexperienced, and the work is great, for the palace is not for man but for the LORD God.
2 So I have provided with all my might for the house of my God—gold for the gold things, silver for the silver, bronze for the bronze, iron for the iron, and wood for the wood, onyx stones and inlaid stones, stones of antimony and variegated colors, all kinds of precious stones, and marble in abundance.
3 Moreover, because I delight in the house of my God, I give my own private treasure of gold and silver for the house of my God, beyond all that I have already provided for the holy house—
4 three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the buildings,
5 gold for the gold work and silver for the silver work, and for all the work done by the craftsmen. Who then is willing to consecrate himself today to the LORD?”


6 Then the leaders of the fathers’ houses made their freewill offerings, as did the leaders of the tribes, the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and the officers over the king’s work.
7 They gave for the service of the house of God five thousand talents and ten thousand darics of gold, ten thousand talents of silver, eighteen thousand talents of bronze, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.
8 And whoever possessed precious stones gave them to the treasury of the house of the LORD, in the custody of Jehiel the Gershonite.


9 Then the people rejoiced because they had given willingly, for with a whole heart they had offered freely to the LORD. And David the king also rejoiced greatly.
10 Therefore David blessed the LORD in the presence of all the assembly. And David said, “Blessed are You, O LORD, the God of Israel our father, forever and ever.
11 Yours, O LORD, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the victory and the majesty, for everything in the heavens and on the earth is Yours. Yours is the kingdom, O LORD, and You are exalted as head over all.
12 Both riches and honor come from You, and You rule over all. In Your hand are power and might, and in Your hand it is to make great and to give strength to all.
13 Now therefore, our God, we give You thanks and praise Your glorious name.


14 But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly as this? For all things come from You, and from Your hand we have given You.
15 For we are sojourners before You and strangers, as all our fathers were. Our days on the earth are like a shadow, and there is no hope of remaining.
16 O LORD our God, all this abundance that we have provided to build You a house for Your holy name comes from Your hand, and all is Yours.
17 I know, my God, that You test the heart and take pleasure in uprightness. In the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things, and now I have seen with joy Your people, who are present here, offering willingly to You.
18 O LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our fathers, keep forever such purposes and thoughts in the heart of Your people, and direct their hearts toward You.
19 Grant to Solomon my son a whole heart, to keep Your commandments, Your testimonies, and Your statutes, and to do all of them, and to build the palace for which I have made provision.”
20 Then David said to all the assembly, “Bless the LORD your God.” And all the assembly blessed the LORD, the God of their fathers, and bowed their heads and prostrated themselves before the LORD and before the king.
21 And the next day they offered sacrifices to the LORD, and offered burnt offerings to the LORD: a thousand bulls, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
22 And they ate and drank before the LORD on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king a second time, and they anointed him as prince for the LORD, and Zadok as priest.


23 Then Solomon sat on the throne of the LORD as king in place of David his father, and he prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.
24 All the leaders and the mighty men, and also all the sons of King David, pledged allegiance to King Solomon.
25 And the LORD made Solomon exceedingly great in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed on him royal majesty such as had not been on any king before him in Israel.


26 Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
27 And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years; he reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
28 And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honor. And Solomon his son reigned in his place.
29 Now the acts of King David, from first to last, are written in the records of Samuel the seer and in the records of Nathan the prophet and in the records of Gad the seer,
30 with all his reign and his might and the events that befell him and Israel and all the kingdoms of the lands.