2 Chronicles 


Chapter 1


1 Solomon the son of David established himself firmly over his kingdom, and the LORD his God was with him and made him exceedingly great.
2 And Solomon spoke to all Israel—to the commanders of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every leader in all Israel, the heads of the fathers’ houses.
3 And Solomon and all the assembly with him went to the high place that was at Gibeon, for the tent of meeting of God, which Moses the servant of the LORD had made in the wilderness, was there.
4 (But the ark of God David had brought up from Kiriath-jearim to the place that David had prepared for it, for he had pitched a tent for it in Jerusalem.)
5 Moreover, the bronze altar that Bezalel the son of Uri, son of Hur, had made, was there before the tabernacle of the LORD. And Solomon and the assembly sought it out.
6 And Solomon went up there to the bronze altar before the LORD, which was at the tent of meeting, and offered a thousand burnt offerings on it.


7 During that night, God appeared to Solomon and said to him, “Ask what I shall give you.”
8 And Solomon said to God, “You have shown great loyal love to David, my father, and have made me king in his place.
9 Now, O LORD God, let your promise to David my father be established, for you have made me king over a people as numerous as the dust of the earth.
10 Now give me wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people, for who can rule this great people of yours?”


11 Then God said to Solomon, “Because this was in your heart, and you have not asked for riches, possessions, honor, or the life of those who hate you, and have not even asked for long life, but have asked for wisdom and knowledge for yourself, that you may rule my people over whom I have made you king—
12 wisdom and knowledge are granted to you. I will also give you riches, possessions, and honor, such as none of the kings who were before you ever had, nor shall any after you have the like.”


13 So Solomon came from the high place that was at Gibeon, from before the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem. And he reigned over Israel.
14 And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen. He had fourteen hundred chariots and twelve thousand horsemen, whom he stationed in the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem.
15 And the king made silver and gold as plentiful in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedar as abundant as the sycamores of the Shephelah.
16 And Solomon’s horses were imported from Egypt and from Kue; the king’s merchants bought them from Kue for a price.
17 They imported a chariot from Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for one hundred fifty. And so they exported them to all the kings of the Hittites and the kings of Aram through their agents.




Chapter 2


1 Now Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of the LORD, and a royal palace for himself.
2 And Solomon assigned seventy thousand men to bear burdens, eighty thousand to quarry stone in the hill country, and thirty-six hundred to oversee them.


3 And Solomon sent word to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, “As you dealt with David my father and sent him cedar to build himself a house to dwell in, so deal with me.
4 Behold, I am about to build a house for the name of the LORD my God, and to dedicate it to him, to burn before him incense of fragrant spices, and for the regular rows of bread, and for burnt offerings morning and evening, on the Sabbaths and the new moons and the appointed feasts of the LORD our God, as ordained forever for Israel.
5 The house that I am about to build will be great, for our God is greater than all gods.
6 But who is able to build him a house, since heaven, even the highest heaven, cannot contain him? Who am I that I should build him a house, except to burn incense before him?
7 So now send me a craftsman skilled to work in gold, silver, bronze, and iron, and in purple, crimson, and blue fabrics, trained also in engraving, to work in Judah and Jerusalem with the craftsmen whom David my father provided.
8 Also send me cedar, cypress, and algum timber from Lebanon, for I know that your servants are skilled in cutting timber in Lebanon. And behold, my servants will be with your servants,
9 to prepare timber for me in abundance, for the house I am about to build will be great and wondrous.
10 Behold, I will give to your servants, the woodcutters who cut the timber, twenty thousand cors of crushed wheat, twenty thousand cors of barley, twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.”


11 Then Huram king of Tyre answered in a letter that he sent to Solomon, “Because the LORD loves his people, he has made you king over them.”
12 Huram also said, “Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel, who made heaven and earth, who has given King David a wise son, endowed with prudence and understanding, who will build a house for the LORD and a royal palace for himself.
13 Now I am sending a skilled man, who has understanding, Huram-abi,
14 the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of Tyre. He is trained to work in gold, silver, bronze, iron, stone, and wood, and in purple, blue, and crimson fabrics and fine linen, and to do all sorts of engraving and execute any design that may be assigned him, with your craftsmen, the craftsmen of my lord David your father.
15 Now then, let my lord send to his servants the wheat, barley, oil, and wine, as he has promised.
16 And we will cut whatever timber you need from Lebanon and bring it to you as rafts by sea to Joppa, so that you may take it up to Jerusalem.”


17 Then Solomon counted all the foreigners who were living in the land of Israel, after the census that David his father had taken, and there were found 153,600.
18 He assigned seventy thousand of them to bear burdens, eighty thousand to quarry stone in the hill country, and thirty-six hundred to oversee them and to make the work go forward.




Chapter 3


1 Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the LORD had appeared to David his father, at the place that David had appointed, on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
2 He began to build on the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
3 Now these were the foundations Solomon laid for building the house of God: the length, in cubits according to the old standard, was sixty cubits, and the width was twenty cubits.
4 The porch that was in front of the house was twenty cubits in length, corresponding to the width of the house, and its height was one hundred twenty. He overlaid it on the inside with pure gold.
5 And the great hall he paneled with cypress and overlaid it with fine gold, and he made palm trees and chains on it.
6 He adorned the house with precious stones for beauty, and the gold was gold from Parvaim.
7 So he overlaid the house—the beams, the thresholds, its walls and its doors—with gold, and he carved cherubim on the walls.


8 And he made the Most Holy Place. Its length, corresponding to the width of the house, was twenty cubits, and its width was twenty cubits. And he overlaid it with six hundred talents of fine gold.
9 The weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. He also overlaid the upper chambers with gold.
10 And in the Most Holy Place he made two cherubim of sculpted work, and they overlaid them with gold.
11 The wings of the cherubim together were twenty cubits long. One wing of the first cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house, and the other wing was five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.
12 And one wing of the second cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house, and the other wing was five cubits, touching the wing of the first cherub.
13 The wings of these cherubim extended twenty cubits, and they stood on their feet, and their faces were turned inward.


14 And he made the veil of blue and purple and crimson and fine linen, and he worked cherubim on it.
15 And he made before the house two pillars thirty-five cubits high, with a capital of five cubits on the top of each.
16 And he made chains in the inner sanctuary and placed them on the tops of the pillars, and he made one hundred pomegranates and placed them on the chains.
17 Then he set up the pillars in front of the temple, one on the right and one on the left. He called the name of the one on the right Jachin, and the name of the one on the left Boaz.




Chapter 4


1 Then he made an altar of bronze, twenty cubits in length, twenty cubits in width, and ten cubits in height.
2 And he made the Sea of cast metal, ten cubits from brim to brim, perfectly round. It was five cubits high, and a line of thirty cubits measured its circumference.
3 Under it were figures resembling oxen, encircling it all around—ten per cubit, surrounding the Sea all around. The oxen were cast in two rows when it was cast.
4 It stood on twelve oxen, three facing north, three facing west, three facing south, and three facing east. The Sea was set on them, and all their hindquarters were turned inward.
5 Its thickness was a handbreadth, and its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It held three thousand baths.
6 He also made ten basins in which to wash, and he set five on the right side and five on the left side. In them they rinsed what was used for the burnt offering, but the Sea was for the priests to wash in.
7 And he made ten golden lampstands according to the prescribed pattern, and he set them in the temple, five on the right side and five on the left.
8 He also made ten tables and placed them in the temple, five on the right side and five on the left. And he made one hundred basins of gold.
9 Then he made the court of the priests and the great court and doors for the court, and he overlaid the doors with bronze.
10 And he set the Sea at the southeast corner of the house.


11 Huram also made the pots, the shovels, and the bowls. So Huram finished the work that he did for King Solomon in the house of God:
12 the two pillars, the bowls and the two capitals on the tops of the pillars, and the two latticeworks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the tops of the pillars,
13 and the four hundred pomegranates for the two latticeworks—two rows of pomegranates for each latticework—to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars.
14 He also made the stands and the basins on the stands,
15 and the one Sea and the twelve oxen underneath it.
16 The pots, the shovels, the forks, and all the utensils Huram-abi made of polished bronze for King Solomon for the house of the LORD.


17 In the plain of the Jordan the king cast them, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah.
18 Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance, for the weight of the bronze could not be determined.
19 So Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of God: the golden altar, the tables for the bread of the Presence,
20 the lampstands and their lamps of pure gold to burn before the inner sanctuary as prescribed,
21 the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs, of purest gold,
22 and the snuffers, the basins, the ladles, and the firepans, of pure gold. As for the entrance to the house, the inner doors to the Most Holy Place and the doors of the nave of the temple were of gold.




Chapter 5


1 Thus all the work that Solomon did for the house of the LORD was finished. And Solomon brought in the things that David his father had dedicated—the silver, the gold, and all the vessels—and he put them in the treasuries of the house of God.
2 Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the tribes, the leaders of the fathers’ houses of the sons of Israel, in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of the city of David, which is Zion.
3 And all the men of Israel assembled before the king at the feast that is in the seventh month.


4 And all the elders of Israel came, and the Levites took up the ark.
5 And they brought up the ark and the tent of meeting and all the holy vessels that were in the tent. The Levitical priests brought them up.
6 And King Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, who had assembled before him, were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted or numbered for multitude.
7 And the priests brought the ark of the covenant of the LORD to its place, in the inner sanctuary of the house, in the Most Holy Place, beneath the wings of the cherubim.
8 For the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its poles.
9 And the poles were so long that the ends of the poles were seen from the Holy Place before the inner sanctuary, but they could not be seen from outside. And they are there to this day.
10 There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets that Moses put there at Horeb, where the LORD made a covenant with the sons of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.


11 Now when the priests came out of the Holy Place—for all the priests who were present had consecrated themselves, without regard to their divisions,
12 and all the Levitical singers—Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun, their sons and their brothers—clothed in fine linen, with cymbals, harps, and lyres, stood east of the altar with one hundred twenty priests who were blowing trumpets.
13 And it was the duty of the trumpeters and singers to make themselves heard in unison in praise and thanksgiving to the LORD. And when the song was raised, with trumpets and cymbals and other instruments, in praise to the LORD,
“For he is good,
for his loyal love endures forever,”
the house—the house of the LORD—was filled with a cloud,
14 so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud, for the glory of the LORD filled the house of God.




Chapter 6


1 Then Solomon said, “The Lord has said that he would dwell in thick darkness,
2 and I have built a house for you, a place for your dwelling forever.”


3 Then the king turned toward the assembly of Israel and blessed all the congregation, and the whole assembly stood.


4 He said, “Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father and with his hand has fulfilled it, saying,
5 ‘Since the day that I brought my people out of Egypt, I chose no city from among all the tribes of Israel in which to build a house for my name, nor did I choose anyone to be prince over my people Israel,
6 but I chose Jerusalem that my name might be there, and I chose David to rule my people Israel.’
7 It was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.
8 But the Lord said to David my father: ‘Because it was in your heart to build a house for my name, you did well in having that in your heart,
9 yet you shall not build the house, but your son is the one who shall build the house for my name.’
10 So the Lord has fulfilled his word that he spoke; for I have arisen in the place of David my father, and I sit on the throne of Israel, just as the Lord promised, and I have built the house for the name of the Lord, the God of Israel.
11 There I have set the ark, in which is the covenant of the Lord that he made with the sons of Israel.”


12 Then Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all Israel, spread out his hands to heaven—(Solomon had made a bronze platform, five cubits long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high; he stood on it and knelt before all Israel, his hands spread to heaven)—


13 and prayed, “O Lord, God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven above or on earth beneath—those who keep covenant and steadfast love with their servants who walk before you in whole‑hearted devotion,
14 who have kept the promise you made with David my father, saying, ‘You shall not lack a man before me to sit on the throne of Israel, provided your sons take heed to their way, walking in my law as you walked before me.’
15 Now therefore, O Lord, God of Israel, confirm your word with your servant David my father.
16 But can God indeed dwell with humanity on earth? Surely the heavens—even the highest heavens—cannot contain you; how much less this house that I have built!
17 Yet turn your attention to the prayer of your servant and to his plea, O Lord, my God, to listen to the cry and the prayer your servant offers before you today.
18 May your eyes be open toward this house night and day, toward the place of which you said, ‘My name shall be there,’ to listen to the prayer that your servant shall pray toward this place.
19 Hear the prayers of your servant and of your people Israel when they pray toward this house; hear from heaven your dwelling place, and when you hear, forgive.”


20 “If a man sins against his neighbor and is forced to swear an oath before your altar in this house,
21 then hear from heaven and act—judge, convict the guilty by bringing his deeds upon his own head, and justify the righteous by giving him according to his righteousness.


22 When your people Israel are defeated before an enemy because they have sinned against you, and they return and confess your name and pray and plea before you in this house,
23 then hear from heaven, forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them back to the land you gave to their fathers.


24 If the heavens are shut and there is no rain because they have sinned against you, yet they pray toward this house and confess your name and turn from their sin when you afflict them,
25 then hear from heaven, forgive the sin of your servants and of your people Israel when you teach them the right way in which they should walk, and give rain upon your land, which you have given to your people as an inheritance.


26 If there is famine in the land, pestilence, blight, mildew, locust, or caterpillar; or if their enemies besiege them in their cities—whatever plague or sickness;
27 whatever prayer or plea is made by any man or by all your people Israel, each knowing the affliction of his own heart, and spreading out his hands toward this house—
28 then hear from heaven your dwelling place, forgive, and give to each man according to all his ways, for you alone know the heart of each man—
29 that they may fear you all their days and walk in your ways in the land you gave to our fathers.


30 Moreover, concerning a foreigner who is not of your people Israel but comes from a distant land on account of your name—
31 when he hears of your great name, your mighty hand, and your outstretched arm, and comes and prays toward this house,
32 then hear from heaven your dwelling place and do according to all for which the foreigner calls, so that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as do your people Israel, and know that this house I have built is called by your name.


33 If your people go out to battle against their enemies, wherever you send them, and they pray to the Lord toward the city you have chosen and the house that I have built for your name,
34 then hear from heaven their prayer and supplication, and uphold their cause.


35 If they sin against you—for there is no man who does not sin—and you are angry with them and give them to an enemy, so that they are carried away captive to a land far or near,
36 yet if they return to you with all their heart and soul in the land of their exile, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have acted wickedly,’
37 and return to you with whole‑hearted devotion, in the land of their exile, toward the land you gave to our fathers, to the city you chose, and to the house I have built for your name,
38 then hear from heaven, uphold their cause, and forgive your people who have sinned against you.


39 Now, my God, let your eyes be open and your ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.


40 Now therefore arise, O Lord God, and enter your resting place, you and the ark of your strength; may your priests be clothed with salvation and your faithful ones rejoice in goodness.


41 O Lord God, do not turn away the face of your anointed; remember your steadfast love for your servant David.




Chapter 7


1 When Solomon finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices, and the glory of the LORD filled the house.
2 The priests were not able to enter the house of the LORD because the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD.
3 When all the sons of Israel saw the fire come down and the glory of the LORD upon the house, they bowed down with their faces to the ground on the pavement, worshiped, and gave thanks to the LORD, saying, “For he is good, for his steadfast love endures forever.”


4 Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before the LORD.
5 King Solomon offered as a sacrifice twenty-two thousand cattle and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
6 The priests stood at their posts, and the Levites also with the instruments for the songs of the LORD that King David had made for giving thanks to the LORD—“for his steadfast love endures forever”—whenever David offered praise by their hand. The priests blew trumpets before them, and all Israel stood.


7 Solomon consecrated the middle of the court that was before the house of the LORD, for there he offered the burnt offerings and the fat of the peace offerings, because the bronze altar that Solomon had made was not able to contain the burnt offering, the grain offering, and the fat.


8 At that time Solomon held the feast for seven days, and all Israel with him—a very great assembly from Lebo-hamath to the Brook of Egypt.
9 On the eighth day they held a solemn assembly, for they had kept the dedication of the altar seven days and the feast seven days.
10 On the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the people away to their tents, joyful and glad of heart for the good that the LORD had done for David and for Solomon and for his people Israel.


11 Thus Solomon finished the house of the LORD and the king’s house, and all that Solomon had planned to do in the house of the LORD and in his own house, he accomplished successfully.


12 Then the LORD appeared to Solomon at night and said to him, “I have heard your prayer and have chosen this place for myself as a house of sacrifice.
13 When I shut up the heavens so that there is no rain, or command the locust to devour the land, or send pestilence among my people,
14 if my people who are called by my name humble themselves and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and heal their land.
15 Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to the prayer offered in this place.
16 For now I have chosen and sanctified this house that my name may be there forever. My eyes and my heart will be there always.


17 As for you, if you walk before me as David your father walked, doing all that I have commanded you and keeping my statutes and my judgments,
18 then I will establish your royal throne, as I covenanted with David your father, saying, ‘You shall not lack a man to rule in Israel.’


19 But if you turn aside and forsake my statutes and my commandments that I have set before you, and go and serve other gods and worship them,
20 then I will uproot them from my land that I have given them, and this house that I have sanctified for my name I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it a proverb and a byword among all the nations.
21 And this house, which was exalted—everyone passing by it will be appalled and will say, ‘Why has the LORD done thus to this land and to this house?’
22 Then they will say, ‘Because they abandoned the LORD, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and embraced other gods, worshiping them and serving them—therefore he has brought all this disaster upon them.’”




Chapter 8


1 And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the house of the LORD and his own house,
2 that Solomon rebuilt the cities that Huram had given to him, and settled the sons of Israel there.


3 And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah and prevailed against it.
4 He built Tadmor in the wilderness and all the store cities that he built in Hamath.
5 He also built upper Beth-horon and lower Beth-horon, fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars,
6 and Baalath, and all the store cities that Solomon had, and all the chariot cities, and the cities for the horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build in Jerusalem and in Lebanon and in all the land of his dominion.


7 All the people who were left of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of Israel—
8 from their descendants who were left after them in the land, whom the sons of Israel had not destroyed—Solomon made forced laborers to this day.
9 But of the sons of Israel Solomon made no slaves for his work; they were men of war and his chief officers and captains and commanders of his chariots and his horsemen.
10 And these were the chief officers of King Solomon: two hundred and fifty, who ruled over the people.


11 Solomon brought the daughter of Pharaoh up from the city of David to the house that he had built for her, for he said, “My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places to which the ark of the LORD has come are holy.”


12 Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to the LORD on the altar of the LORD that he had built before the porch,
13 as the duty of each day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the three annual appointed feasts—the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Booths.


14 And according to the ordinance of David his father, he appointed the divisions of the priests for their service, and the Levites for their duties of praise and ministry before the priests, as the duty of each day required, and the gatekeepers in their divisions at each gate—for so David the man of God had commanded.
15 And they did not depart from the king’s command to the priests and Levites in any matter, or concerning the treasuries.


16 Now all the work of Solomon was prepared from the day of the foundation of the house of the LORD until it was finished. So the house of the LORD was completed.


17 Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber and to Eloth on the shore of the sea in the land of Edom.
18 And Huram sent him ships by the hand of his servants, and servants knowledgeable of the sea. And they went with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and took from there four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought it to King Solomon.




Chapter 9


1 And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to test Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great retinue, with camels bearing spices and gold in abundance and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she spoke with him about all that was on her heart.
2 And Solomon answered all her questions. There was nothing hidden from Solomon that he could not explain to her.
3 And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,
4 and the food of his table, and the seating of his servants, and the standing of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and their apparel, and his ascent by which he went up to the house of the LORD, there was no more spirit in her.


5 And she said to the king, “The report was true that I heard in my own land about your words and your wisdom,
6 but I did not believe the reports until I came and my own eyes had seen it. And yet, half of the greatness of your wisdom was not told me; you exceed the report that I heard.
7 Happy are your men, and happy are these your servants, who continually stand before you and hear your wisdom.
8 Blessed be the LORD your God, who has delighted in you to set you on His throne as king for the LORD your God! Because your God loved Israel, to establish them forever, He made you king over them, to do justice and righteousness.”


9 And she gave the king one hundred and twenty talents of gold, and a very great quantity of spices and precious stones. There were no such spices as those the queen of Sheba gave to King Solomon.
10 And the servants of Huram and the servants of Solomon who brought gold from Ophir also brought algum trees and precious stones.
11 And the king made from the algum trees steps for the house of the LORD and for the king’s house, and lyres and harps for the singers. None like these had been seen before in the land of Judah.
12 And King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all that she desired, whatever she asked, besides what she had brought to the king. So she turned and went back to her own land, she and her servants.


13 Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold,
14 besides what was brought by the merchants and traders. And all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the land brought gold and silver to Solomon.


15 And King Solomon made two hundred large shields of beaten gold—six hundred shekels of beaten gold went into each large shield.
16 And he made three hundred small shields of beaten gold—three hundred shekels of gold went into each shield. And the king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon.


17 And the king made a great ivory throne and overlaid it with pure gold.
18 The throne had six steps, and a footstool of gold was attached to the throne. On each side of the seat were armrests, and two lions stood beside the armrests,
19 and twelve lions stood there, one on each side of the six steps. Nothing like it was made for any kingdom.


20 All King Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. Silver was not considered as anything in the days of Solomon.
21 For the king’s ships went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram. Every three years the ships of Tarshish came bringing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks.


22 So King Solomon surpassed all the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom.
23 And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God had put into his heart.
24 Each one brought his gift, articles of silver and articles of gold, and garments, weapons, spices, horses, and mules—so much year by year.


25 And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, and he stationed them in the chariot cities and with the king in Jerusalem.
26 And he ruled over all the kings from the River to the land of the Philistines and to the border of Egypt.
27 And the king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedar as plentiful as the sycamore trees that are in the Shephelah.
28 And horses were imported for Solomon from Egypt and from all lands.


29 Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, from beginning to end, are they not written in the words of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
30 And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
31 And Solomon slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of David his father, and Rehoboam his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 10


1 And Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king.
2 And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard the news—for he was in Egypt where he had fled from King Solomon—that Jeroboam returned from Egypt.
3 And they sent and called him. Then Jeroboam and all Israel came and spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
4 “Your father made our yoke heavy. Now therefore, lighten the harsh labor and the heavy yoke that your father put on us, and we will serve you.”
5 And he said to them, “Return to me in three days.” So the people departed.


6 Then King Rehoboam took counsel with the old men who had stood before Solomon his father while he was still alive, saying, “What counsel do you give me to answer this people?”
7 And they spoke to him, saying, “If you will be kind to this people and please them and speak good words to them, they will be your servants forever.”
8 But he forsook the counsel that the old men had given him and took counsel with the young men who had grown up with him and stood before him.
9 And he said to them, “What advice do you give, that we may answer this people who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Lighten the yoke that your father put on us’?”
10 And the young men who had grown up with him said to him, “Thus shall you speak to the people who said to you, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but you lighten it for us.’ Thus you shall say to them, ‘My little finger is thicker than my father's thighs.
11 And now, whereas my father laid on you a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.’”


12 So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam on the third day, as the king had spoken, saying, “Return to me on the third day.”
13 And the king answered them harshly, and King Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men.
14 And he spoke to them according to the counsel of the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it. My father disciplined you with whips, but I will discipline you with scorpions.”
15 So the king did not listen to the people, for it was a turn of events from God, that the LORD might fulfill His word, which He spoke by the hand of Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.


16 And when all Israel saw that the king did not listen to them, the people answered the king, saying,
“What portion do we have in David?
We have no inheritance in the son of Jesse.
Each man to your tents, O Israel!
Now look to your own house, O David.”
So all Israel went to their tents.
17 But as for the sons of Israel who lived in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.


18 Then King Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the forced labor, but the sons of Israel stoned him to death with stones. And King Rehoboam hurried to mount his chariot to flee to Jerusalem.
19 So Israel has been in rebellion against the house of David to this day.




Chapter 11


1 And when Rehoboam had come to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, one hundred and eighty thousand chosen warriors, to fight against Israel, to restore the kingdom to Rehoboam.
2 But the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
3 “Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,
4 ‘Thus says the LORD: You shall not go up or fight against your brothers. Return each man to his house, for I caused this to happen.’” So they listened to the words of the LORD and returned from going against Jeroboam.


5 And Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem, and he built cities for defense in Judah.
6 He built Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa,
7 Beth-zur, Soco, Adullam,
8 Gath, Mareshah, Ziph,
9 Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah,
10 Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron, which are fortified cities in Judah and Benjamin.
11 And he strengthened the fortresses and put commanders in them, and stores of food, oil, and wine.
12 And in every city he put shields and spears and made them very strong. So he held Judah and Benjamin.


13 And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel presented themselves to him from all their territory.
14 For the Levites left their common lands and their possessions and came to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons had cast them out from serving as priests to the LORD.
15 And he appointed his own priests for the high places and for the goat demons and for the calves that he had made.
16 And those who had set their hearts to seek the LORD God of Israel came after them from all the tribes of Israel to Jerusalem to sacrifice to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
17 So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and upheld Rehoboam the son of Solomon for three years, for they walked in the way of David and Solomon for three years.


18 And Rehoboam took as a wife Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, and of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse.
19 And she bore him sons: Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham.
20 And after her he took Maacah the daughter of Absalom, and she bore him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith.
21 And Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter of Absalom more than all his wives and concubines (for he took eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and fathered twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters).
22 And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah as chief, prince among his brothers, for he intended to make him king.
23 And he dealt wisely and distributed some of his sons through all the territories of Judah and Benjamin, to all the fortified cities, and he gave them abundant provisions and sought many wives for them.




Chapter 12


1 And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom and had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the LORD, and all Israel with him.
2 And, because they had been unfaithful to the LORD, it happened in the fifth year of King Rehoboam that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem
3 with twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand horsemen. And the people were without number who came with him out of Egypt—Lubim, Sukkiim, and Ethiopians.
4 And he took the fortified cities of Judah and came as far as Jerusalem.


5 Then Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam and to the princes of Judah who had gathered at Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, “Thus says the LORD: You have forsaken Me, so I also have forsaken you into the hand of Shishak.”
6 Then the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves and said, “The LORD is righteous.”
7 And when the LORD saw that they humbled themselves, the word of the LORD came to Shemaiah, saying, “They have humbled themselves, I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and My wrath shall not be poured out on Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
8 Nevertheless, they shall be his servants, so that they may learn the difference between serving Me and serving the kingdoms of the nations.”


9 So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem and took away the treasures of the house of the LORD and the treasures of the king’s house. He took everything. He also took away the shields of gold that Solomon had made.
10 And King Rehoboam made shields of bronze in their place and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard who kept watch at the entrance of the king’s house.
11 And whenever the king entered the house of the LORD, the guards came and carried them, and afterward returned them to the guardroom.
12 And when he humbled himself, the wrath of the LORD turned from him, so as not to destroy him completely. And after that, conditions in Judah were good.


13 So King Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem and reigned. Now Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city the LORD had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put His name there. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonite.
14 And he did evil, because he did not set his heart to seek the LORD.


15 Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the records of Shemaiah the prophet and Iddo the seer, according to the genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
16 And Rehoboam slept with his fathers and was buried in the city of David, and Abijah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 13


1 In the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam, Abijah began to reign over Judah.
2 He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
3 And Abijah went out to battle with an army of valiant warriors, four hundred thousand chosen men. And Jeroboam drew up in battle array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, mighty warriors.


4 Then Abijah stood on Mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill country of Ephraim, and said, “Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel:
5 Do you not know that the LORD, the God of Israel, gave the kingship over Israel forever to David and his sons by a covenant of salt?
6 Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, a servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up and rebelled against his lord,
7 and worthless men, scoundrels, gathered around him and defied Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and irresolute and could not withstand them.


8 “And now you think to withstand the kingdom of the LORD in the hand of the sons of David, because you are a great multitude and have with you the golden calves that Jeroboam made for you as gods.
9 Have you not driven out the priests of the LORD, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and made for yourselves priests like the peoples of other lands? Whoever comes to ordain himself with a young bull and seven rams becomes a priest of what are not gods.
10 But as for us, the LORD is our God, and we have not forsaken Him. We have priests ministering to the LORD who are sons of Aaron, and Levites for their service.
11 They offer to the LORD every morning and every evening burnt offerings and incense of sweet spices, and they set the rows of bread on the pure table and care for the golden lampstand, that its lamps may burn every evening. For we keep the charge of the LORD our God, but you have forsaken Him.
12 Behold, God is with us at our head, and His priests have the trumpets of alarm to sound against you. O sons of Israel, do not fight against the LORD, the God of your fathers, for you will not succeed.”


13 But Jeroboam had set an ambush to come around behind them, so that they were in front of Judah, and the ambush was behind them.
14 And when Judah turned around, behold, they were attacked in front and rear. Then they cried to the LORD, and the priests blew the trumpets.
15 And the men of Judah raised a shout. And when the men of Judah shouted, God defeated Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
16 And the sons of Israel fled before Judah, and God gave them into their hand.
17 And Abijah and his people struck them with great force, so that there fell slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.
18 Thus the sons of Israel were subdued at that time, and the sons of Judah prevailed, because they relied on the LORD, the God of their fathers.


19 And Abijah pursued Jeroboam and took cities from him—Bethel with its villages, Jeshanah with its villages, and Ephron with its villages.
20 And Jeroboam did not recover strength again in the days of Abijah. And the LORD struck him, and he died.
21 But Abijah grew strong and took fourteen wives and fathered twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters.


22 Now the rest of the acts of Abijah, his ways and his words, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo.




Chapter 14


1 And Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his place. In his days the land had rest for ten years.


2 And Asa did what was good and right in the eyes of the LORD his God.
3 He removed the foreign altars and the high places and broke down the pillars and cut down the Asherim.
4 And he commanded Judah to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, and to observe the law and the commandment.
5 He also removed from all the cities of Judah the high places and the incense altars. And the kingdom had rest under him.


6 He built fortified cities in Judah, for the land had rest. He had no war in those years, because the LORD had given him peace.
7 And he said to Judah, “Let us build these cities and surround them with walls and towers, gates and bars. The land is still ours because we have sought the LORD our God. We have sought Him, and He has given us peace on every side.” So they built and prospered.


8 And Asa had an army of three hundred thousand from Judah who bore shields and spears, and two hundred eighty thousand from Benjamin who carried shields and drew bows. All these were mighty men of valor.


9 And Zerah the Ethiopian came out against them with an army of a million men and three hundred chariots, and he came as far as Mareshah.
10 And Asa went out to meet him, and they drew up for battle in the Valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
11 And Asa cried to the LORD his God, saying, “O LORD, there is none like You to help between the mighty and the powerless. Help us, O LORD our God, for we rely on You, and in Your name we have come against this multitude. O LORD, You are our God; let not man prevail against You.”
12 So the LORD struck the Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah, and the Ethiopians fled.
13 And Asa and the people who were with him pursued them as far as Gerar, and the Ethiopians fell until none remained alive, for they were broken before the LORD and His army. And they carried away very much spoil.
14 And they struck all the cities around Gerar, for the terror of the LORD was upon them. They plundered all the cities, for there was much spoil in them.
15 And they also struck the tents of those who had livestock and carried away sheep in abundance and camels. Then they returned to Jerusalem.




Chapter 15


1 Now the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded.
2 And he went out to meet Asa and said to him, “Hear me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin: The LORD is with you while you are with Him. If you seek Him, He will be found by you; but if you forsake Him, He will forsake you.
3 For many days Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching priest and without law,
4 but when in their distress they turned to the LORD, the God of Israel, and sought Him, He was found by them.
5 In those times there was no peace to him who went out or to him who came in, but great disturbances were on all the inhabitants of the lands.
6 They were broken in pieces, nation against nation and city against city, for God troubled them with every kind of distress.
7 But you, be strong and do not let your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded.”


8 And when Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage and removed the abominations from all the land of Judah and Benjamin and from the cities he had taken in the hill country of Ephraim. And he repaired the altar of the LORD that was before the vestibule of the LORD.


9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and those from Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon who dwelt with them, for great numbers had deserted to him from Israel when they saw that the LORD his God was with him.
10 They gathered at Jerusalem in the third month of the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.
11 And they sacrificed to the LORD on that day from the spoil that they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.
12 And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul,
13 and that whoever would not seek the LORD, the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.
14 And they swore to the LORD with a loud voice and with shouting and with trumpets and with horns.
15 And all Judah rejoiced over the oath, for they had sworn with all their heart and had sought Him with all their desire, and He was found by them, and the LORD gave them rest all around.


16 Even Maacah, the mother of King Asa, he removed from being queen mother because she had made an abominable image for Asherah. And Asa cut down her image, crushed it, and burned it at the brook Kidron.
17 But the high places were not removed from Israel. Nevertheless, Asa’s heart was wholly true all his days.
18 And he brought into the house of God the sacred gifts of his father and his own sacred gifts—silver and gold and vessels.


19 And there was no more war until the thirty-fifth year of the reign of Asa.




Chapter 16


1 In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel came up against Judah and built Ramah, to prevent anyone from going out or coming in to Asa king of Judah.
2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold from the treasuries of the house of the LORD and the king’s house, and sent them to Ben-hadad king of Syria, who lived in Damascus, saying,
3 “There is a covenant between me and you, as there was between my father and your father. Behold, I am sending you silver and gold. Go, break your covenant with Baasha king of Israel, so that he may withdraw from me.”
4 And Ben-hadad listened to King Asa and sent the commanders of his armies against the cities of Israel, and they conquered Ijon, Dan, Abel-maim, and all the store cities of Naphtali.
5 And when Baasha heard of it, he ceased building Ramah and stopped his work.
6 Then King Asa took all Judah, and they carried away the stones of Ramah and its timber with which Baasha had been building, and with them he built Geba and Mizpah.


7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah and said to him, “Because you relied on the king of Syria and did not rely on the LORD your God, therefore the army of the king of Syria has escaped from your hand.
8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Libyans a vast army with very many chariots and horsemen? Yet because you relied on the LORD, He gave them into your hand.
9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole earth to show Himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is fully His. You have done foolishly in this; from now on you will have wars.”
10 Then Asa was angry with the seer and put him in the prison house, for he was enraged at him for this. And Asa oppressed some of the people at that time.


11 Now the acts of Asa, first and last, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
12 And in the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa became diseased in his feet, and his disease was severe. Yet even in his disease he did not seek the LORD, but only the physicians.
13 And Asa slept with his fathers, dying in the forty-first year of his reign.
14 And they buried him in the tomb that he had cut for himself in the city of David. They laid him on a bier filled with various kinds of spices blended by the perfumer’s art, and they made a very great fire in his honor.




Chapter 17


1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place, and he strengthened himself against Israel.
2 And he placed troops in all the fortified cities of Judah and set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim that Asa his father had captured.


3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the earlier ways of his father David. He did not seek the Baals,
4 but sought the God of his father and walked in His commandments, and not according to the practices of Israel.
5 Therefore the LORD established the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he had riches and honor in abundance.
6 And his heart was courageous in the ways of the LORD. Moreover, he removed the high places and the Asherim from Judah.


7 In the third year of his reign he sent his officials—Ben-hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah—to teach in the cities of Judah,
8 and with them the Levites—Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah—and with these, the priests Elishama and Jehoram.
9 And they taught in Judah, having with them the Book of the Law of the LORD. They went throughout all the cities of Judah and taught among the people.


10 And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were around Judah, and they did not make war against Jehoshaphat.
11 And some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents and silver as tribute, and the Arabians also brought him flocks—seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven thousand seven hundred male goats.
12 So Jehoshaphat grew steadily greater, and he built in Judah fortresses and store cities.
13 And he had large supplies in the cities of Judah. He also had soldiers, mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem.


14 This was their muster according to their fathers’ houses: Of Judah, the commanders of thousands: Adnah the commander, with three hundred thousand mighty men of valor;
15 and next to him Jehohanan the commander, with two hundred eighty thousand;
16 and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself to the LORD, with two hundred thousand mighty men of valor.
17 Of Benjamin: Eliada, a mighty man of valor, with two hundred thousand men armed with bow and shield;
18 and next to him Jehozabad, with one hundred eighty thousand armed for war.
19 These were in the service of the king, besides those whom the king had placed in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.




Chapter 18


1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance, and he allied himself by marriage with Ahab.
2 And after some years he went down to Ahab in Samaria. And Ahab slaughtered sheep and oxen in abundance for him and for the people who were with him, and urged him to go up against Ramoth-gilead.
3 And Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, “Will you go with me to Ramoth-gilead?” And he answered him, “I am as you are, my people as your people. We will be with you in the war.”


4 Then Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire today for the word of the LORD.”
5 And the king of Israel gathered the prophets, four hundred men, and said to them, “Shall we go to battle against Ramoth-gilead, or shall I refrain?” And they said, “Go up, for God will give it into the hand of the king.”
6 But Jehoshaphat said, “Is there not still a prophet of the LORD here that we may inquire of him?”
7 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is still one man by whom we may inquire of the LORD, Micaiah the son of Imlah, but I hate him, for he never prophesies good concerning me, but always evil.” And Jehoshaphat said, “Let not the king say so.”
8 Then the king of Israel called an officer and said, “Bring quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.”


9 Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, and they were sitting at the threshing floor at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. And all the prophets were prophesying before them.
10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for himself horns of iron and said, “Thus says the LORD: With these you shall push the Syrians until they are destroyed.”
11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, “Go up to Ramoth-gilead and triumph, and the LORD will give it into the hand of the king.”


12 And the messenger who went to summon Micaiah said to him, “Look, the words of the prophets with one accord are favorable to the king. Let your word be like one of theirs, and speak favorably.”
13 But Micaiah said, “As the LORD lives, what my God says, that I will speak.”


14 And when he came to the king, the king said to him, “Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I refrain?” And he said, “Go up and triumph; they shall be given into your hand.”
15 But the king said to him, “How many times shall I make you swear that you speak to me nothing but the truth in the name of the LORD?”
16 Then he said, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains, like sheep that have no shepherd. And the LORD said, ‘These have no master; let each return to his house in peace.’”
17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Did I not say to you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?”


18 And Micaiah said, “Therefore hear the word of the LORD: I saw the LORD sitting on His throne, and all the host of heaven standing on His right and on His left.
19 And the LORD said, ‘Who will entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead?’ And one said one thing, and another said another.
20 Then a spirit came forward and stood before the LORD, saying, ‘I will entice him.’ And the LORD said to him, ‘By what means?’
21 And he said, ‘I will go out and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ And He said, ‘You are to entice him, and you shall succeed. Go out and do so.’
22 Now therefore, look how the LORD has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these your prophets; the LORD has declared disaster concerning you.”


23 Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near and struck Micaiah on the cheek and said, “Which way did the Spirit of the LORD go from me to speak to you?”
24 And Micaiah said, “You shall see on that day when you go into an inner room to hide yourself.”
25 And the king of Israel said, “Seize Micaiah and take him back to Amon the governor of the city and to Joash the king’s son,
26 and say, ‘Thus says the king: Put this man in prison and feed him meager rations of bread and water until I return in peace.’”
27 And Micaiah said, “If you return in peace, the LORD has not spoken by me.” And he said, “Listen, all you people!”


28 So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
29 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself and go into battle, but you wear your robes.” And the king of Israel disguised himself, and they went into battle.
30 Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his chariots, “Do not fight with anyone small or great, but only with the king of Israel.”
31 And when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “It is the king of Israel.” So they turned to fight against him, and Jehoshaphat cried out, and the LORD helped him. God drew them away from him.
32 For when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him.


33 But a certain man drew his bow at random and struck the king of Israel between the scale armor and the breastplate. So he said to the driver of his chariot, “Turn around and carry me out of the battle, for I am wounded.”
34 And the battle continued that day, and the king of Israel was propped up in his chariot facing the Syrians until evening. And at sunset he died.




Chapter 19


1 And Jehoshaphat king of Judah returned in peace to his house in Jerusalem.
2 And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him and said to King Jehoshaphat, “Should you help the wicked and love those who hate the LORD? Because of this, wrath has come upon you from before the LORD.
3 Nevertheless, some good is found in you, for you have removed the Asherahs from the land and have set your heart to seek God.”


4 And Jehoshaphat lived in Jerusalem, and he went out again among the people, from Beersheba to the hill country of Ephraim, and brought them back to the LORD, the God of their fathers.
5 He appointed judges in the land in all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,
6 and said to the judges, “Consider what you do, for you judge not for man but for the LORD. He is with you in giving judgment.
7 Now then, let the fear of the LORD be upon you. Be careful what you do, for there is no injustice with the LORD our God, nor partiality or taking bribes.”


8 Moreover, in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat appointed certain Levites and priests and heads of families of Israel to give judgment for the LORD and to settle disputes. They lived in Jerusalem,
9 and he commanded them, saying, “You shall act in the fear of the LORD, in faithfulness, and with a whole heart.
10 Whenever a case comes to you from your brothers who live in their cities, concerning bloodshed, law or commandment, statutes or rules, then you shall warn them, that they may not incur guilt before the LORD and wrath may not come upon you and your brothers. Thus you shall do, and you will not incur guilt.
11 And also, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of the LORD, and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the governor of the house of Judah, in all the king’s matters, and the Levites shall serve you as officers. Deal courageously, and may the LORD be with the upright.”




Chapter 20


1 After this, the sons of Moab and the sons of Ammon, and with them some of the Meunites, came against Jehoshaphat for battle.
2 And messengers came and told Jehoshaphat, “A great multitude is coming against you from beyond the sea, from Aram; and they are in Hazazon-tamar” (that is, En-gedi).
3 Then Jehoshaphat was afraid and set his face to seek the LORD, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
4 And Judah gathered to seek help from the LORD; indeed, they came from all the cities of Judah to seek the LORD.


5 Then Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of the LORD before the new court,
6 and said, “O LORD, God of our fathers, are You not God in heaven? Do You not rule over all the kingdoms of the nations? In Your hand are power and might, so that no one is able to withstand You.
7 Did You not, our God, drive out the inhabitants of this land before Your people Israel and give it forever to the descendants of Abraham Your friend?
8 And they have lived in it and have built for You in it a sanctuary for Your name, saying,
9 ‘If disaster comes upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house and before You—for Your name is in this house—and cry out to You in our distress, and You will hear and save.’


10 And now, see how the sons of Ammon and Moab and Mount Seir, whom You would not allow Israel to invade when they came from the land of Egypt, and so they turned away from them and did not destroy them—
11 They are rewarding us by coming to drive us out of Your possession, which You have given us to inherit.
12 O our God, will You not judge them? For we have no power against this great multitude that is coming against us, nor do we know what to do, but our eyes are on You.”


13 And all Judah was standing before the LORD, with their infants, their wives, and their children.


14 Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, son of Benaiah, son of Jeiel, son of Mattaniah, a Levite of the sons of Asaph, in the midst of the assembly.
15 And he said, “Listen, all Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem and King Jehoshaphat. Thus says the LORD to you: Do not be afraid and do not be dismayed because of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours but God’s.
16 Tomorrow go down against them. They will come up by the ascent of Ziz. You will find them at the end of the valley, east of the wilderness of Jeruel.
17 You will not need to fight in this battle. Take your stand, stand firm, and see the salvation of the LORD on your behalf, O Judah and Jerusalem. Do not be afraid and do not be dismayed. Tomorrow go out against them, and the LORD will be with you.”


18 Then Jehoshaphat bowed his face to the ground, and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before the LORD, worshiping the LORD.
19 And the Levites, of the sons of the Kohathites and the sons of the Korahites, stood up to praise the LORD, the God of Israel, with a very loud voice.


20 And they rose early in the morning and went out into the wilderness of Tekoa. And as they went out, Jehoshaphat stood and said, “Listen to me, O Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem! Put your trust in the LORD your God and you will be established; put your trust in His prophets and you will succeed.”
21 And when he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed those who sang to the LORD and those who praised Him in holy attire, as they went out before the army, saying, “Give thanks to the LORD, for His steadfast love endures forever.”


22 And when they began to sing and to praise, the LORD set ambushes against the sons of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, who had come against Judah, so that they were struck down.
23 For the sons of Ammon and Moab rose up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir to destroy and annihilate them. And when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, they all helped to destroy one another.


24 And when Judah came to the watchtower of the wilderness, they looked toward the multitude, and saw that they were dead bodies fallen to the ground; none had escaped.
25 When Jehoshaphat and his people came to take their spoil, they found among them goods, garments, and precious things in abundance, which they took for themselves more than they could carry. And they were gathering the spoil for three days—it was so much.


26 On the fourth day they assembled in the Valley of Beracah, for there they blessed the LORD. Therefore that place has been called the Valley of Beracah to this day.
27 Then all the men of Judah and Jerusalem returned, with Jehoshaphat at their head, to Jerusalem with joy, for the LORD had made them rejoice over their enemies.
28 And they came to Jerusalem with harps and lyres and trumpets to the house of the LORD.


29 And the fear of God was upon all the kingdoms of the lands when they heard that the LORD had fought against the enemies of Israel.
30 So the kingdom of Jehoshaphat was at peace, for his God gave him rest all around.


31 Now Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
32 And he walked in the way of Asa his father and did not turn aside from it, doing what was right in the eyes of the LORD.
33 However, the high places were not removed; the people had not fully directed their hearts to the God of their fathers.


34 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, from first to last, they are written in the chronicles of Jehu the son of Hanani, which are recorded in the Book of the Kings of Israel.


35 After this Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined with Ahaziah king of Israel, who acted wickedly.
36 He joined with him to make ships to go to Tarshish, and they made the ships in Ezion-geber.
37 But Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, “Because you have joined with Ahaziah, the LORD will destroy what you have made.” And the ships were wrecked and were not able to go to Tarshish.




Chapter 21


1 Then Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Jehoram his son reigned in his place.
2 And he had brothers, sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariahu, Michael, and Shephatiah. All these were sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.
3 Their father gave them great gifts of silver, gold, and precious things, with fortified cities in Judah, but the kingdom he gave to Jehoram, for he was the firstborn.


4 Now when Jehoram had taken over the kingdom of his father and established himself, he killed all his brothers with the sword, and also some of the princes of Israel.
5 Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
6 And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as the house of Ahab had done—for the daughter of Ahab was his wife—and he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD.
7 Yet the LORD was not willing to destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that He had made with David, and since He had promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons forever.


8 In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah and set up a king of their own.
9 Then Jehoram went out with his commanders and all his chariots. And he rose by night and struck the Edomites who had surrounded him and the commanders of the chariots.
10 So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah also revolted at that time from under his hand, because he had forsaken the LORD, the God of his fathers.


11 Moreover, he made high places in the mountains of Judah and led the inhabitants of Jerusalem into unfaithfulness and caused Judah to go astray.


12 Then a letter came to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, “Thus says the LORD, the God of David your father, ‘Because you have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat your father or in the ways of Asa king of Judah,
13 but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel and have caused Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the harlot, as the house of Ahab played the harlot, and also have killed your brothers, those of your father’s house who were better than you,
14 therefore, the LORD will strike your people with a great blow—your sons, your wives, and all your possessions—
15 and you yourself will suffer a severe illness, an illness of your bowels, until your bowels come out because of the disease, day by day.’”


16 And the LORD stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines and the Arabians who were near the Ethiopians.
17 And they came up into Judah and invaded it, and carried away all the possessions that were found in the king’s house, and also his sons and his wives, so that not a son was left to him except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.


18 And after all this the LORD struck him in his bowels with an incurable disease.
19 And in the course of time, at the end of two years, his bowels came out because of his disease, and he died in great agony. And his people made no fire in his honor, like the fires made for his fathers.


20 He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. And he departed with no one's regret. And they buried him in the city of David, but not in the tombs of the kings.




Chapter 22


1 Then the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah, his youngest son, king in his place, for the raiders who came with the Arabs into the camp had killed all the older sons. So Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.
2 Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah, the granddaughter of Omri.
3 He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his counselor to do wickedly.
4 And he did what was evil in the sight of the LORD like the house of Ahab, for they were his counselors after the death of his father, to his destruction.
5 He also followed their counsel and went with Joram son of Ahab king of Israel to wage war against Hazael king of Aram at Ramoth-gilead. But the Arameans wounded Joram.


6 So he returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which they had inflicted on him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Aram. And Ahaziah son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.
7 But it was from God that the downfall of Ahaziah came through his going to Joram. For when he came, he went out with Joram to meet Jehu son of Nimshi, whom the LORD had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
8 And when Jehu was executing judgment on the house of Ahab, he found the officials of Judah and the sons of Ahaziah’s brothers who were attending Ahaziah, and he killed them.
9 Then he sought Ahaziah, and they caught him while he was hiding in Samaria. They brought him to Jehu and put him to death, and they buried him, for they said, “He is the grandson of Jehoshaphat, who sought the LORD with all his heart.” So the house of Ahaziah had no one left with strength to rule the kingdom.


10 Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she rose and destroyed all the royal offspring of the house of Judah.
11 But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash son of Ahaziah and stole him away from among the king’s sons who were being put to death, and placed him and his nurse in a bedroom. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of King Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest (for she was the sister of Ahaziah), hid him from Athaliah so that she did not put him to death.
12 And he was hidden with them in the house of God for six years, while Athaliah reigned over the land.




Chapter 23


1 In the seventh year, Jehoiada strengthened himself and made a covenant with the commanders of hundreds: Azariah son of Jeroham, Ishmael son of Jehohanan, Azariah son of Obed, Maaseiah son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat son of Zichri.
2 They went throughout Judah and gathered the Levites from all the cities of Judah, and the heads of the fathers’ houses of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.
3 And all the assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And Jehoiada said to them, “Behold, the king’s son shall reign, as the LORD said concerning the sons of David.
4 This is the thing that you shall do: one third of you, of the priests and Levites who enter on the Sabbath, shall be gatekeepers,
5 and one third shall be at the king’s house, and one third at the Gate of the Foundation. And all the people shall be in the courts of the house of the LORD.
6 But let no one enter the house of the LORD except the priests and the ministering Levites; they may enter, for they are holy, but all the people shall keep the instructions of the LORD.
7 The Levites shall surround the king, each man with his weapons in his hand. Whoever enters the house is to be put to death. Stay close to the king wherever he goes.”


8 So the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. They each took his men, those who came on duty on the Sabbath, with those who went off duty on the Sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest did not dismiss the divisions.
9 And Jehoiada the priest gave to the commanders of hundreds the spears and large and small shields that had been King David’s, which were in the house of God.
10 And he set all the people, each man with his weapon in his hand, from the south side of the house to the north side of the house, around the altar and the house, to guard the king on every side.
11 Then they brought out the king’s son, and put the crown on him and administered him the oath, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him and said, “Long live the king!”


12 When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she went to the people in the house of the LORD.
13 And she looked, and saw that the king was standing by his pillar at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpeters were beside the king, and all the people of the land were rejoicing and blowing trumpets, and the singers with musical instruments were leading the praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and cried, “Treason! Treason!”
14 Then Jehoiada the priest brought out the commanders of hundreds who were set over the army and said to them, “Bring her out between the ranks, and put to death with the sword anyone who follows her.” For the priest said, “Do not put her to death in the house of the LORD.”
15 So they laid hands on her, and when she came to the entrance of the Horse Gate of the king’s house, they put her to death there.


16 And Jehoiada made a covenant between himself and all the people and the king, that they should be the LORD’s people.
17 Then all the people went to the house of Baal and tore it down. They broke in pieces his altars and his images, and they killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.
18 And Jehoiada put the offices of the house of the LORD into the hands of the Levitical priests, whom David had assigned over the house of the LORD, to offer the burnt offerings of the LORD, as it is written in the Law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing according to the order of David.
19 He stationed gatekeepers at the gates of the house of the LORD so that no one who was unclean in any respect should enter.


20 And he took the commanders of hundreds, the nobles, the rulers of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought the king down from the house of the LORD. And they came through the upper gate to the king’s house and set the king on the royal throne.
21 So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet, after Athaliah had been put to death with the sword.




Chapter 24


1 Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba.
2 Joash did what was right in the eyes of the LORD all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
3 Jehoiada took for him two wives, and he fathered sons and daughters.


4 After this Joash set his heart on repairing the house of the LORD.
5 He gathered the priests and the Levites and said to them, “Go out to the cities of Judah and collect money from all Israel to repair the house of your God annually, and see to it quickly.” But the Levites did not act quickly.
6 So the king summoned Jehoiada the high priest and said to him, “Why have you not required the Levites to bring in from Judah and Jerusalem the tax imposed by Moses the servant of the LORD and the congregation of Israel for the tent of the testimony?”
7 For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, broke into the house of God and even used all the dedicated things of the house of the LORD for the Baals.


8 So the king commanded, and they made a chest and set it outside the gate of the house of the LORD.
9 And proclamation was made throughout Judah and Jerusalem to bring in for the LORD the tax that Moses the servant of God laid on Israel in the wilderness.
10 And all the princes and all the people rejoiced and brought their contributions and dropped them into the chest until it was full.
11 Whenever the chest was brought to the king's officers by the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the chief priest's officer came and emptied the chest and took it and returned it to its place. They did this day after day, and collected money in abundance.
12 And the king and Jehoiada gave it to those who did the work of the service of the house of the LORD. And they hired masons and carpenters to restore the house of the LORD, and also workers in iron and bronze to repair the house of the LORD.
13 So those doing the work labored, and the repairs progressed in their hands, and they restored the house of God to its original condition and strengthened it.
14 When they had finished, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, and with it were made utensils for the house of the LORD—utensils for the service and for the burnt offerings, and dishes and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of the LORD continually all the days of Jehoiada.


15 But Jehoiada grew old and full of days, and he died; he was a hundred and thirty years old at his death.
16 They buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel and for God and his house.


17 After the death of Jehoiada the princes of Judah came and bowed down to the king. Then the king listened to them.
18 And they abandoned the house of the LORD, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherim and the idols. So wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this guilt of theirs.
19 Yet he sent prophets among them to bring them back to the LORD. These testified against them, but they would not listen.


20 Then the Spirit of God entered Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, and he stood above the people and said to them, “Thus says God, Why do you transgress the commandments of the LORD so that you cannot prosper? Because you have forsaken the LORD, he has also forsaken you.”
21 But they conspired against him, and by command of the king they stoned him with stones in the court of the house of the LORD.
22 Thus Joash the king did not remember the kindness that Jehoiada, Zechariah’s father, had shown him, but killed his son. And as he was dying, he said, “May the LORD see and avenge!”


23 At the turn of the year, the army of the Syrians came up against Joash. They came to Judah and Jerusalem and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people and sent all their spoil to the king of Damascus.
24 Though the army of the Syrians had come with a small company of men, the LORD delivered a very great army into their hand, because they had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers. So they executed judgment on Joash.
25 When they had departed from him, leaving him severely wounded, his servants conspired against him because of the blood of the son of Jehoiada the priest, and killed him on his bed. So he died, and they buried him in the city of David, but they did not bury him in the tombs of the kings.


26 These are the ones who conspired against him: Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
27 Now concerning his sons and the many oracles about him and the rebuilding of the house of God, see how they are written in the Chronicles of the Book of the Kings. Then, Amaziah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 25


1 Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, yet not with a whole heart.


3 As soon as the kingdom was firmly in his hand, he struck down his servants who had assassinated the king, his father.
4 But he did not put their children to death, according to what is written in the Law, in the Book of Moses, where the LORD commanded, “Fathers shall not be put to death for their children, nor shall children be put to death for their fathers, but each shall die for his own sin.”


5 Then Amaziah assembled Judah and set them by clans under commanders of thousands and of hundreds for all Judah and Benjamin. He mustered those twenty years old and upward, and found that they were three hundred thousand choice men, fit for war, able to handle spear and shield.
6 He also hired a hundred thousand mighty men of valor from Israel for a hundred talents of silver.
7 But a man of God came to him and said, “O king, do not let the army of Israel go with you, for the LORD is not with Israel, with all these Ephraimites.
8 But if you do go with them, do it and be strong for the battle—for God will make you stumble before the enemy, for God has power to help or to make one stumble.”
9 And Amaziah said to the man of God, “But what shall we do about the hundred talents that I have given to the army of Israel?” The man of God answered, “The LORD is able to give you much more than this.”
10 So Amaziah discharged the army that had come to him from Ephraim, sending them home. And they became very angry with Judah and returned home in fierce anger.


11 But Amaziah took courage and led out his people and went to the Valley of Salt and struck down ten thousand men of Seir.
12 The men of Judah captured another ten thousand alive and took them to the top of a cliff and threw them down from the top of the rock, and they were all dashed to pieces.
13 But the men of the army whom Amaziah had sent back, not allowing them to go with him to battle, raided the cities of Judah, from Samaria to Beth-horon, and struck down three thousand people in them and took much spoil.


14 After Amaziah came from striking down the Edomites, he brought the gods of the men of Seir and set them up as his gods and worshiped them and made offerings to them.
15 Therefore the LORD was angry with Amaziah and sent to him a prophet, who said to him, “Why have you sought the gods of a people who did not deliver their own people from your hand?”
16 But as he was speaking, the king said to him, “Have we made you a counselor to the king? Stop! Why should you be struck down?” So the prophet stopped, but said, “I know that God has determined to destroy you, because you have done this and have not listened to my counsel.”


17 Then, Amaziah king of Judah took counsel and sent to Joash the son of Jehoahaz, son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come, let us look one another in the face.”
18 But Joash, king of Israel, replied to Amaziah, king of Judah, “A thistle in Lebanon sent to a cedar of Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son for a wife,’ and a wild beast of Lebanon passed by and trampled the thistle.
19 You say, ‘See, I have struck down Edom,’ and your heart has lifted you up in boastfulness. Stay at home. Why should you provoke trouble so that you fall, you and Judah with you?”
20 But Amaziah would not listen, for it was of God, in order that he might give them into the hand of their enemies, because they had sought the gods of Edom.
21 So Joash, king of Israel, went up, and he and Amaziah, king of Judah, faced one another in battle at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
22 And Judah was defeated by Israel, and every man fled to his home.
23 And Joash king of Israel captured Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash, son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the Ephraim Gate to the Corner Gate, four hundred cubits.
24 And he seized all the gold and silver and all the vessels that were found in the house of God in the care of Obed-edom. He also seized the treasuries of the king's house, took hostages, and returned to Samaria.


25 Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel.
26 Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, from first to last, are they not written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel?
27 From the time when he turned away from the LORD, they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish and put him to death there.
28 And they brought him on horses and buried him with his fathers in the city of David.




Chapter 26


1 And all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in place of his father Amaziah.
2 He built Eloth and restored it to Judah after the king slept with his fathers.
3 Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
4 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
5 He set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who instructed him in the fear of God. And as long as he sought the LORD, God made him prosper.


6 He went out and made war against the Philistines and broke through the wall of Gath and the wall of Jabneh and the wall of Ashdod. And he built cities in the territory of Ashdod and among the Philistines.
7 God helped him against the Philistines and against the Arabians who lived in Gur-baal and against the Meunites.
8 The Ammonites gave tribute to Uzziah, and his fame spread even to the border of Egypt, for he became very strong.


9 Moreover, Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner Gate and at the Valley Gate and at the Angle, and fortified them.
10 And he built towers in the wilderness and hewed out many cisterns, for he had large herds, both in the Shephelah and in the plain. He had farmers and vinedressers in the hills and in the fertile lands, for he loved the soil.
11 Moreover, Uzziah had an army of soldiers, fit for war, in divisions according to the numbers in the muster made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the direction of Hananiah, one of the king's commanders.
12 The whole number of the heads of fathers' houses of mighty men of valor was two thousand six hundred.
13 Under their command was an army of three hundred seven thousand five hundred, who could make war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.
14 And Uzziah prepared for all the army shields, spears, helmets, coats of mail, bows, and stones for slinging.
15 In Jerusalem he made engines, invented by skillful men, to be on the towers and the corners, to shoot arrows and great stones. And his fame spread far, for he was marvelously helped, till he was strong.


16 But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction. For he was unfaithful to the LORD his God and entered the temple of the LORD to burn incense on the altar of incense.
17 But Azariah the priest went in after him, with eighty priests of the LORD who were men of valor,
18 and they confronted King Uzziah and said to him, “It is not for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to the LORD, but for the priests, the sons of Aaron, who are consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary, for you have done wrong, and it will bring you no honor from the LORD God.”
19 Then Uzziah was angry. Now he had a censer in his hand to burn incense, and when he became angry with the priests, leprosy broke out on his forehead in the presence of the priests in the house of the LORD, by the altar of incense.
20 And Azariah the chief priest and all the priests looked at him, and saw that he was leprous in his forehead. And they rushed him out quickly, and he himself hurried to go out, because the LORD had struck him.


21 And King Uzziah was a leper to the day of his death, and he lived in a separate house, for he was excluded from the house of the LORD. And Jotham, his son, was over the king’s household, governing the people of the land.
22 Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, from first to last, Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, wrote down.
23 And Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the burial field that belonged to the kings, for they said, “He is a leper.” And Jotham, his son, reigned in his place.




Chapter 27


1 Jotham was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerushah, the daughter of Zadok.
2 He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, just as his father Uzziah had done—except he did not enter the temple of the LORD. But the people still acted corruptly.


3 He built the upper gate of the house of the LORD, and he did much building on the wall of Ophel.
4 Moreover, he built cities in the hill country of Judah, and in the forests he built fortresses and towers.
5 He fought with the king of the Ammonites and prevailed against them. That year the Ammonites gave him a hundred talents of silver, ten thousand cors of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. The Ammonites paid him the same in the second and third years.


6 So Jotham grew strong, because he ordered his ways before the LORD his God.
7 Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars and his ways, see how they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.
8 He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
9 And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David. And Ahaz his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 28


1 Ahaz was twenty years old when he became king, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He did not do what was right in the eyes of the LORD, as David his father had done.
2 Instead, he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel and even made molten images for the Baals.
3 He burned incense in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom and burned his sons in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom the LORD had driven out before the sons of Israel.
4 He sacrificed and burned incense on the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree.


5 Therefore the LORD his God gave him into the hand of the king of Syria, who struck him and carried away a great number of his people as captives and brought them to Damascus. He was also given into the hand of the king of Israel, who struck him with a great slaughter.
6 For Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in Judah a hundred twenty thousand in one day—all valiant men—because they had forsaken the LORD, the God of their fathers.
7 And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the king's son, Azrikam the officer over the palace, and Elkanah the second to the king.
8 And the sons of Israel took captive two hundred thousand of their kinsmen, women, sons, and daughters. They also took a great amount of spoil from them and brought the spoil to Samaria.


9 But a prophet of the LORD was there, named Oded, and he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria and said to them, “Because the LORD, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he gave them into your hand, but you have slaughtered them in a rage that has reached up to heaven.
10 And now you intend to subjugate the men of Judah and Jerusalem as your male and female slaves. But are you not also guilty before the LORD your God?
11 Now hear me, and send back the captives you have taken from your brothers, for the fierce wrath of the LORD is upon you.”


12 Then some of the heads of the sons of Ephraim—Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai—stood up against those coming from the war,
13 and said to them, “You shall not bring the captives in here, for you propose to bring guilt upon us before the LORD by adding to our sins and to our guilt, for our guilt is already great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.”
14 So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the leaders and all the assembly.
15 And the men who were mentioned by name rose and took the captives, and with the spoil they clothed all who were naked among them. They clothed them, gave them sandals, food and drink, and anointed them, and carrying all the feeble among them on donkeys, they brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria.


16 At that time King Ahaz sent to the kings of Assyria for help.
17 For again the Edomites had come and struck Judah and carried away captives.
18 The Philistines also had made raids on the cities in the lowland and the Negev of Judah and had taken Beth-shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco with its villages, Timnah with its villages, and Gimzo with its villages, and they settled there.
19 For the LORD humbled Judah because of Ahaz king of Israel, for he had caused a lack of restraint in Judah and had been most unfaithful to the LORD.
20 So Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came against him and afflicted him instead of strengthening him.
21 For Ahaz took a portion from the house of the LORD, from the palace of the king, and from the princes, and gave it to the king of Assyria, but it did not help him.


22 In the time of his distress he became even more unfaithful to the LORD—this same King Ahaz.
23 For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, who had struck him, and said, “Because the gods of the kings of Syria helped them, I will sacrifice to them so that they may help me.” But they were his downfall and the downfall of all Israel.
24 And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God and cut them to pieces, and he shut the doors of the house of the LORD and made himself altars in every corner of Jerusalem.
25 In every city of Judah he made high places to burn incense to other gods, and he provoked the LORD, the God of his fathers, to anger.
26 Now the rest of his acts and all his ways, from first to last, behold, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
27 And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, in Jerusalem, but they did not bring him into the tombs of the kings of Israel. And Hezekiah his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 29


1 Hezekiah became king when he was twenty-five years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah the daughter of Zechariah.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, according to all that David his father had done.


3 In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of the LORD and repaired them.
4 And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them into the square on the east.
5 Then he said to them, “Listen to me, O Levites! Now sanctify yourselves and sanctify the house of the LORD, the God of your fathers, and carry the filthiness out from the holy place.
6 For our fathers have been unfaithful and have done what was evil in the eyes of the LORD our God, and have forsaken him and turned their faces away from the dwelling place of the LORD, and turned their backs.
7 They also shut the doors of the porch and extinguished the lamps, and have not burned incense or offered burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel.
8 Therefore the wrath of the LORD has been upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he has made them an object of horror, of astonishment, and of hissing, as you see with your own eyes.
9 For our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.


10 Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with the LORD, the God of Israel, that his burning anger may turn away from us.
11 My sons, do not now be negligent, for the LORD has chosen you to stand before him, to minister to him, and to be his ministers and burn offerings to him.”


12 Then the Levites arose: Mahath son of Amasai, and Joel son of Azariah, from the sons of the Kohathites; and from the sons of Merari, Kish son of Abdi, and Azariah son of Jehallelel; and from the Gershonites, Joah son of Zimmah, and Eden son of Joah;
13 and from the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeiel; and from the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah;
14 and from the sons of Heman, Jehiel and Shimei; and from the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.
15 And they gathered their brothers and sanctified themselves, and went in according to the commandment of the king, by the words of the LORD, to cleanse the house of the LORD.
16 So the priests went into the inner part of the house of the LORD to cleanse it, and they brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of the LORD into the court of the house of the LORD. Then the Levites received it to carry it out to the Kidron Valley.
17 Now they began to clean on the first day of the first month, and on the eighth day of the month they came to the porch of the LORD. Then they cleansed the house of the LORD for eight more days, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they finished.


18 Then they went to King Hezekiah and said, “We have cleansed all the house of the LORD, and the altar of burnt offering with all its vessels, and the table of showbread with all its vessels.
19 Moreover, all the vessels which King Ahaz in his reign cast aside in his unfaithfulness, we have prepared and sanctified; and they are now before the altar of the LORD.”


20 Then King Hezekiah arose early and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of the LORD.
21 And they brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats for a sin offering for the kingdom, the sanctuary, and Judah. And he commanded the sons of Aaron the priests to offer them on the altar of the LORD.
22 So they slaughtered the bulls, and the priests received the blood and sprinkled it on the altar. Then they slaughtered the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar; they slaughtered the lambs also and sprinkled the blood on the altar.
23 Then they brought near the male goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly, and they laid their hands on them.
24 The priests slaughtered them and purged their blood on the altar to make atonement for all Israel, for the king commanded the burnt offering and the sin offering for all Israel.


25 He then stationed the Levites in the house of the LORD with cymbals, with harps, and with lyres, according to the commandment of David and of Gad the king’s seer, and of Nathan the prophet; for the commandment was from the LORD through his prophets.
26 And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.
27 Then Hezekiah gave the order to offer the burnt offering on the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song to the LORD also began with the trumpets, accompanied by the instruments of David king of Israel.
28 And all the assembly bowed down, while the singers sang and the trumpets sounded—all this continued until the burnt offering was finished.
29 And when the burnt offering was finished, the king and all who were present with him bowed down and worshiped.
30 Moreover, King Hezekiah and the rulers ordered the Levites to sing praises to the LORD with the words of David and of Asaph the seer. So they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed down and worshiped.


31 Then Hezekiah said, “Now you have consecrated yourselves to the LORD. Come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings to the house of the LORD.” And the assembly brought sacrifices and thank offerings, and all who were willing of heart brought burnt offerings.
32 And the number of the burnt offerings which the assembly brought was seventy bulls, one hundred rams, and two hundred lambs—all these as a burnt offering to the LORD.
33 And the consecrated things were six hundred bulls and three thousand sheep.
34 But the priests were too few, so that they could not skin all the burnt offerings. Therefore their brothers the Levites helped them until the work was finished and until the priests had sanctified themselves, for the Levites were more upright of heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
35 There were also many burnt offerings with the fat of the peace offerings and with the drink offerings for the burnt offerings. So the service of the house of the LORD was set in order.
36 Then Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced over what God had prepared for the people, for the thing came about suddenly.




Chapter 30


1 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and he also wrote letters to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the LORD in Jerusalem to keep the Passover to the LORD, the God of Israel.
2 For the king and his princes and all the assembly in Jerusalem had taken counsel to keep the Passover in the second month,
3 for they could not keep it at that time because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number, nor had the people been gathered to Jerusalem.
4 And the thing was right in the eyes of the king and in the eyes of all the assembly.
5 So they established a decree to pass throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the Passover to the LORD, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem; for they had not done it in great numbers as it was written.


6 And the couriers went with the letters from the hand of the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, according to the commandment of the king, saying, “Sons of Israel, return to the LORD, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that he may return to the remnant who escaped from the hand of the kings of Assyria.
7 And do not be like your fathers and your brothers, who were unfaithful to the LORD, the God of their fathers, so that he made them an object of horror, as you see.
8 Now do not stiffen your necks as your fathers did, but yield yourselves to the LORD and come to his sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever, and serve the LORD your God, that his burning anger may turn away from you.
9 For if you return to the LORD, your brothers and your sons will find compassion before those who led them captive and will return to this land. For the LORD your God is gracious and compassionate, and he will not turn his face away from you if you return to him.”


10 So the couriers passed from city to city through the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and as far as Zebulun, but they laughed them to scorn and mocked them.
11 Nevertheless, some men of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem.
12 The hand of God was also on Judah to give them one heart to do the commandment of the king and of the princes by the word of the LORD.


13 Now many men were gathered at Jerusalem to keep the Feast of Unleavened Bread in the second month, a very great assembly.
14 And they arose and removed the altars which were in Jerusalem, and they also removed all the incense altars and cast them into the Kidron Valley.
15 Then they slaughtered the Passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the second month. And the priests and the Levites were ashamed, so they sanctified themselves and brought burnt offerings into the house of the LORD.
16 And they stood in their place according to their custom, according to the law of Moses the man of God; the priests sprinkled the blood from the hand of the Levites.
17 For there were many in the assembly who had not sanctified themselves; therefore the Levites had charge of slaughtering the Passover lambs for everyone who was not clean, to sanctify them to the LORD.
18 For a multitude of the people, many from Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet they ate the Passover otherwise than it was written. For Hezekiah prayed for them, saying, “May the good LORD pardon everyone
19 who sets his heart to seek God, the LORD, the God of his fathers, though not according to the purification of the sanctuary.”
20 And the LORD heard Hezekiah and healed the people.


21 And the sons of Israel who were present at Jerusalem kept the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven days with great gladness. And the Levites and the priests praised the LORD day by day, singing with loud instruments to the LORD.
22 Then Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all the Levites who showed good understanding of the service of the LORD. So they ate the appointed feast seven days, sacrificing peace offerings and giving thanks to the LORD, the God of their fathers.


23 And the whole assembly took counsel to keep the feast another seven days, and they kept it seven more days with gladness.
24 For Hezekiah king of Judah gave the assembly one thousand bulls and seven thousand sheep, and the princes gave the assembly one thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep. And a great number of priests sanctified themselves.
25 And all the assembly of Judah rejoiced, with the priests and the Levites and all the assembly that came from Israel, and the sojourners who came from the land of Israel, and those who lived in Judah.
26 So there was great joy in Jerusalem, for since the days of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there had not been anything like this in Jerusalem.
27 Then the priests and the Levites arose and blessed the people, and their voice was heard and their prayer came to his holy dwelling place, to heaven.




Chapter 31


1 Now when all this was finished, all Israel who were present went out to the cities of Judah and broke in pieces the pillars, cut down the Asherim, and pulled down the high places and the altars throughout all Judah and Benjamin, as well as in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the sons of Israel returned, each man to his possession in their cities.


2 And Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and the Levites by their divisions, each man according to his service, the priests and the Levites for burnt offerings and peace offerings, to minister and to give thanks and to praise in the gates of the camp of the LORD.
3 The contribution of the king from his own possessions was for the burnt offerings, the burnt offerings of morning and evening, and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, the new moons, and the appointed feasts, as it is written in the law of the LORD.
4 Moreover he commanded the people who lived in Jerusalem to give the portion due to the priests and the Levites, that they might be strong in the law of the LORD.


5 And as soon as the command spread abroad, the sons of Israel gave in abundance the firstfruits of grain, wine, oil, honey, and of all the produce of the field; and they brought in abundantly the tithe of everything.
6 And the sons of Israel and Judah who lived in the cities of Judah also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of the dedicated things which had been consecrated to the LORD their God, and they laid them in heaps.
7 In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.
8 When Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed the LORD and his people Israel.
9 Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.


10 And Azariah the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, answered him and said, “Since they began to bring the contributions into the house of the LORD, we have had enough to eat and have plenty left, for the LORD has blessed his people, and this great abundance is left over.”
11 Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare chambers in the house of the LORD, and they prepared them.
12 And they faithfully brought in the contributions, the tithes, and the dedicated things; and Conaniah the Levite was the officer in charge of them, and Shimei his brother was second.
13 And Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismakiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of King Hezekiah and Azariah the chief officer of the house of God.
14 And Kore son of Imnah the Levite, the gatekeeper at the east, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the contributions of the LORD and the most holy things.


15 Under his authority were Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, to distribute faithfully to their brothers by divisions, to great and small alike.
16 Apart from those males who were recorded by genealogy, from three years old and upward, they distributed to everyone who entered the house of the LORD for his daily portion, for their service in their duties according to their divisions.
17 The genealogy of the priests was recorded according to their fathers’ households, as was also that of the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their duties by their divisions.
18 They were enrolled with all their little ones, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, the whole assembly, for in their faithfulness they sanctified themselves in holiness.
19 And for the sons of Aaron the priests, who were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every city, there were men who were designated by name to distribute portions to every male among the priests and to everyone who was recorded by genealogy among the Levites.


20 Thus Hezekiah did throughout all Judah, and he did what was good and right and faithful before the LORD his God.
21 And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law and in the commandment, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart and prospered.




Chapter 32


1 After these acts of faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came and entered Judah and encamped against the fortified cities, and thought to break through them for himself.
2 And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come and that he intended to make war on Jerusalem,
3 he took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop up the water of the springs which were outside the city, and they helped him.
4 So many people were gathered and they stopped up all the springs and the brook which flowed through the land, saying, “Why should the kings of Assyria come and find much water?”
5 And he strengthened himself and rebuilt all the wall that had been broken down, and raised it up to the towers, and built another wall outside, and strengthened the Millo in the city of David, and made weapons and shields in abundance.
6 He appointed military commanders over the people and gathered them to him in the square at the city gate, and spoke encouragingly to them, saying,


7 “Be strong and courageous, do not be afraid nor dismayed before the king of Assyria, nor before all the multitude that is with him, for the one with us is greater than the one with him.
8 With him is only an arm of flesh, but with us is the LORD our God to help us and to fight our battles.” And the people relied on the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.


9 After this, Sennacherib king of Assyria, while he and all his forces with him were besieging Lachish, sent his servants to Jerusalem to Hezekiah king of Judah and to all Judah who were in Jerusalem, saying,
10 “Thus says Sennacherib, king of Assyria, ‘On what are you trusting that you remain in Jerusalem under siege?
11 Is not Hezekiah misleading you to give you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying, “The LORD our God will deliver us from the hand of the king of Assyria”?
12 Has not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and said to Judah and to Jerusalem, “You shall worship before one altar and on it you shall burn incense”?
13 Do you not know what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands in any way able to deliver their land out of my hand?
14 Who was there among all the gods of those nations which my fathers utterly destroyed who could deliver his people from my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you from my hand?
15 Now therefore, do not let Hezekiah deceive you or mislead you like this, and do not believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people from my hand or from the hand of my fathers. How much less shall your God deliver you from my hand?’”


16 And his servants spoke further against the LORD God and against his servant Hezekiah.
17 He also wrote letters to insult the LORD, the God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, “As the gods of the nations of the lands who have not delivered their people from my hand, so the God of Hezekiah shall not deliver his people from my hand.”
18 And they called out with a loud voice in the language of Judah to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten and terrify them, that they might capture the city.
19 And they spoke against the God of Jerusalem as against the gods of the peoples of the earth, the work of men’s hands.


20 But King Hezekiah and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, prayed because of this and cried out to heaven.
21 And the LORD sent an angel who cut off every mighty warrior, commander, and officer in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned in shame to his own land. And when he entered the house of his god, some of his own offspring killed him there by the sword.
22 Thus the LORD saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib king of Assyria and from the hand of all others, and he guided them on every side.
23 And many brought gifts to the LORD at Jerusalem and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah, so that he was exalted in the sight of all nations from then on.


24 In those days Hezekiah became sick to the point of death, and he prayed to the LORD, and he spoke to him and gave him a sign.
25 But Hezekiah did not respond according to the benefit done to him, for his heart was lifted up; therefore wrath came on him and on Judah and Jerusalem.
26 However, Hezekiah humbled the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of the LORD did not come on them in the days of Hezekiah.


27 Now Hezekiah had immense riches and honor, and he made for himself treasuries for silver, for gold, for precious stones, for spices, for shields, and for all kinds of valuable vessels;
28 storehouses also for the produce of grain, wine, and oil; stalls for all kinds of cattle, and sheepfolds for the flocks.
29 He made cities for himself, and acquired flocks and herds in abundance, for God had given him very great possessions.
30 It was the same Hezekiah who stopped the upper outlet of the waters of Gihon and directed them downward to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all that he did.
31 And so in the matter of the envoys of the princes of Babylon, who were sent to him to inquire of the wonder that had happened in the land, God left him alone to test him, that he might know all that was in his heart.


32 Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his deeds of devotion, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, in the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel.
33 So Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the upper section of the tombs of the sons of David; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his place.




Chapter 33


1 Manasseh was twelve years old when he became king, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.
2 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according to the abominations of the nations whom the LORD dispossessed before the sons of Israel.
3 For he rebuilt the high places which Hezekiah his father had torn down, and he erected altars for the Baals and made Asherim, and worshiped all the host of heaven and served them.
4 He built altars in the house of the LORD, of which the LORD had said, “In Jerusalem shall my name be forever.”
5 He built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of the LORD.
6 He also made his sons pass through the fire in the Valley of Ben-hinnom, practiced soothsaying, used divination, practiced sorcery, and dealt with mediums and with spiritists. He did much evil in the eyes of the LORD, provoking him to anger.
7 He put the carved image of the idol that he had made in the house of God, of which God had said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen from all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever,
8 and I will not again remove the foot of Israel from the land which I have appointed for your fathers—if only they are careful to do all that I have commanded them according to all the law and the statutes and the ordinances given by the hand of Moses.”
9 So Manasseh led Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem astray, to do worse than the nations whom the LORD destroyed before the sons of Israel.


10 And the LORD spoke to Manasseh and his people, but they paid no attention.
11 Therefore the LORD brought against them the commanders of the army of the king of Assyria, and they captured Manasseh with hooks, bound him with bronze chains, and brought him to Babylon.
12 When he was in distress, he entreated the favor of the LORD his God and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers.
13 And he prayed to him, and he was moved by his entreaty and heard his plea, and brought him back to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the LORD was God.


14 Afterward he built an outer wall for the city of David west of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance of the Fish Gate; and he encircled Ophel with it and made it very high. Then he put military commanders in all the fortified cities of Judah.
15 He also removed the foreign gods and the idol from the house of the LORD, as well as all the altars which he had built on the mountain of the house of the LORD and in Jerusalem, and he threw them outside the city.
16 He set up the altar of the LORD and sacrificed on it peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the LORD, the God of Israel.
17 Nevertheless, the people still sacrificed on the high places, though only to the LORD their God.


18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of the LORD, the God of Israel, behold, they are written in the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
19 His prayer also, and how he was entreated by him, and all his sin and his unfaithfulness, and the places where he built high places and set up the Asherim and the carved images before he humbled himself, behold, they are written in the chronicles of Hozai.
20 So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house. And Amon his son reigned in his place.


21 Amon was twenty-two years old when he became king, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem.
22 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD, as Manasseh his father had done; Amon sacrificed to all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, and he served them.
23 Moreover, he did not humble himself before the LORD as Manasseh his father had humbled himself, but Amon multiplied guilt.
24 And his servants conspired against him and put him to death in his own house.
25 But the people of the land struck down all those who had conspired against King Amon, and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place.




Chapter 34


1 Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem.
2 And he did what was right in the eyes of the LORD, and walked in the ways of David his father, and did not turn aside to the right or to the left.


3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was still a youth, he began to seek the God of David his father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem of the high places, the Asherim, the carved images, and the cast metal images.
4 And they tore down the altars of the Baals in his presence, and he cut down the incense altars that were high above them; and he smashed to pieces the Asherim, the carved images, and the cast metal images, and ground them to dust, and scattered it on the graves of those who had sacrificed to them.
5 Then he burned the bones of the priests on their altars and cleansed Judah and Jerusalem.
6 And in the cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, Simeon, as far as Naphtali, in their ruins all around,
7 he broke down the altars and beat the Asherim and the carved images into powder, and cut down all the incense altars throughout all the land of Israel. Then he returned to Jerusalem.


8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan son of Azaliah, Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the LORD his God.
9 They came to Hilkiah the high priest and gave him the money that had been brought into the house of God, which the Levites, the doorkeepers, had collected from the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and from all the remnant of Israel, and from all Judah and Benjamin and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
10 And they gave it into the hand of the workmen who were appointed over the house of the LORD, and the workmen who were working in the house of the LORD used it to restore and repair the house.
11 They gave it to the craftsmen and the builders to buy cut stone and timber for ties and beams for the buildings which the kings of Judah had allowed to fall into ruin.
12 And the men did the work faithfully. And over them were appointed Jahath and Obadiah, Levites of the sons of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam of the sons of the Kohathites, to supervise; and other Levites, all who were skillful with musical instruments,
13 were over the burden-bearers and supervised all who did the work in every kind of service. And some of the Levites were scribes, and officers, and gatekeepers.


14 Now when they were bringing out the money that had been brought into the house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found the Book of the Law of the LORD given through Moses.
15 And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the Book of the Law in the house of the LORD.” And Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan.
16 And Shaphan brought the book to the king and also brought back word to the king, saying, “Everything that was committed to your servants, they are doing.
17 They have emptied out the money that was found in the house of the LORD and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers and the workmen.”
18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, “Hilkiah the priest gave me a book.” And Shaphan read it before the king.


19 And when the king heard the words of the law, he tore his clothes.
20 Then the king commanded Hilkiah and Ahikam son of Shaphan and Abdon son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant, saying,
21 “Go, inquire of the LORD for me and for those who are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that has been found. For great is the wrath of the LORD that is poured out against us, because our fathers have not observed the word of the LORD, to do according to all that is written in this book.”


22 So Hilkiah and those whom the king had told went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum son of Tokhath, son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe—she lived in Jerusalem in the Second Quarter—and they spoke to her about this.
23 And she said to them, “Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: Say to the man who sent you to me,
24 ‘Thus says the LORD: Behold, I am bringing evil on this place and on its inhabitants, all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah.
25 Because they have forsaken me and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath is poured out on this place, and it shall not be quenched.’


26 But to the king of Judah who sent you to inquire of the LORD, thus you shall say to him, ‘Thus says the LORD, the God of Israel: As for the words which you have heard,
27 because your heart was tender and you humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this place and its inhabitants, and you humbled yourself before me, tore your clothes, and wept before me, I also have heard you, declares the LORD.
28 I will gather you to your fathers, and you shall be gathered to your grave in peace, and your eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring on this place and on its inhabitants.’” And they brought back word to the king.


29 Then the king sent and gathered all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
30 And the king went up to the house of the LORD, and all the men of Judah, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the priests, the Levites, and all the people, great and small; and he read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that had been found in the house of the LORD.
31 And the king stood in his place and made a covenant before the LORD, to walk after the LORD and to keep his commandments and his testimonies and his statutes with all his heart and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant written in this book.
32 And he made all who were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin stand with him. So the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
33 And Josiah removed all the abominations from all the territory belonging to the sons of Israel, and he made all who were present in Israel serve the LORD their God. All his days they did not turn away from following the LORD, the God of their fathers.




Chapter 35


1 Then Josiah kept a Passover to the LORD in Jerusalem, and they slaughtered the Passover lamb on the fourteenth day of the first month.
2 He set the priests in their duties and encouraged them in the service of the house of the LORD.
3 And he said to the Levites who taught all Israel, who were holy to the LORD, “Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon son of David, king of Israel, built. You need no longer carry it on your shoulders. Now serve the LORD your God and his people Israel.
4 Prepare yourselves according to your fathers’ households, in your divisions, as written in the writing of David king of Israel and in the writing of Solomon his son.
5 And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers’ households of your brothers, the sons of the people, and according to the division of the fathers’ households of the Levites.
6 Now slaughter the Passover lamb and consecrate yourselves, and prepare it for your brothers to do according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses.”


7 Josiah contributed to the people, to all who were present, flocks of lambs and young goats, all for the Passover offerings, numbering thirty thousand, and three thousand cattle—these were from the king’s possessions.
8 And his officials contributed willingly to the people, to the priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, officials of the house of God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings two thousand six hundred sheep and three hundred cattle.
9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel his brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chiefs of the Levites, gave to the Levites for Passover offerings five thousand sheep and five hundred cattle.


10 So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place and the Levites in their divisions according to the command of the king.
11 And they slaughtered the Passover lamb, and the priests sprinkled the blood that they received from their hand, while the Levites flayed them.
12 And they set aside the burnt offerings to give them to the divisions of the fathers’ households of the sons of the people, to offer to the LORD, as it is written in the Book of Moses. And they did the same with the cattle.
13 And they roasted the Passover lamb with fire according to the ordinance, and boiled the holy offerings in pots, in kettles, and in pans, and carried them quickly to all the sons of the people.
14 And afterward they prepared portions for themselves and for the priests, because the priests, the sons of Aaron, were offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night. So the Levites prepared portions for themselves and for the priests, the sons of Aaron.
15 And the singers, the sons of Asaph, were in their place according to the command of David, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer, and the gatekeepers were at each gate; they did not need to depart from their service, for their brothers the Levites prepared for them.


16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared that day, to keep the Passover and to offer burnt offerings on the altar of the LORD according to the command of King Josiah.
17 And the sons of Israel who were present kept the Passover at that time, and the Feast of Unleavened Bread seven days.
18 And there had not been a Passover kept like it in Israel since the days of Samuel the prophet; nor had any of the kings of Israel kept such a Passover as Josiah kept, with the priests, the Levites, all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah this Passover was kept.


20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight at Carchemish on the Euphrates, and Josiah went out against him.
21 But he sent messengers to him, saying, “What have I to do with you, king of Judah? I am not coming against you today, but against the house with which I am at war; and God has commanded me to hurry. Stop opposing God who is with me, that he not destroy you.”
22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn away from him, but disguised himself in order to fight with him. He did not listen to the words of Neco from the mouth of God, but came to fight in the plain of Megiddo.
23 And the archers shot King Josiah, and the king said to his servants, “Take me away, for I am badly wounded.”
24 So his servants took him out of the chariot and carried him in his second chariot, and brought him to Jerusalem, and he died and was buried in the tombs of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.


25 Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women have spoken of Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and they made them a statute in Israel. Behold, they are written in the Lamentations.
26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his deeds of devotion according to what is written in the Law of the LORD,
27 and his acts, first and last, they are written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah.




Chapter 36


1 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz son of Josiah and made him king in Jerusalem in the place of his father.
2 Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he became king, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
3 And the king of Egypt deposed him in Jerusalem and imposed on the land a fine of one hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim, his brother, king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. But Neco took his brother Jehoahaz and brought him to Egypt.


5 Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he became king, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; and he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD his God.
6 Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against him and bound him with bronze chains to take him to Babylon.
7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried some of the vessels of the house of the LORD to Babylon and put them in his temple in Babylon.
8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim and the abominations which he did, and what was found against him, are they not written in the Book of the Kings of Israel and Judah? And Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place.


9 Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he became king, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem; and he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD.
10 At the turn of the year King Nebuchadnezzar sent and brought him to Babylon, with the precious vessels of the house of the LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.


11 Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he became king, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
12 And he did what was evil in the eyes of the LORD his God; he did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet, who spoke from the mouth of the LORD.
13 He also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God; but he stiffened his neck and hardened his heart against turning to the LORD, the God of Israel.


14 Moreover, all the leaders of the priests and the people transgressed very much according to all the abominations of the nations, and they defiled the house of the LORD which he had sanctified in Jerusalem.
15 And the LORD, the God of their fathers, sent word to them again and again by his messengers, because he had compassion on his people and on his dwelling place.
16 But they mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and scoffed at his prophets, until the wrath of the LORD rose against his people, and there was no remedy.


17 Therefore he brought up against them the king of the Chaldeans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or virgin, old man or infirm; he gave them all into his hand.
18 All the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king and of his officials, he brought them all to Babylon.
19 And they burned the house of God and tore down the wall of Jerusalem, and burned all its palaces with fire, and destroyed all its precious vessels.
20 And those who had escaped from the sword he carried away to Babylon, and they became servants to him and to his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia.
21 This was to fulfill the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed its Sabbaths. All the days of its desolation it kept Sabbath to fulfill seventy years.


22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and also put it in writing, saying,
23 “Thus says Cyrus king of Persia: The LORD, the God of heaven, has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he has appointed me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever among you of all his people—may the LORD his God be with him—let him go up.”