Nehemiah


Chapter 1


1 The words of Nehemiah son of Hacaliah. Now it came to pass in the month of Chislev, in the twentieth year, while I was in Susa the citadel,
2 that Hanani, one of my brothers, came with certain men from Judah. And I asked them concerning the Jews who had escaped, who had survived the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.
3 And they said to me, “The remnant there in the province who survived the captivity are in great trouble and disgrace. The wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and its gates have been burned with fire.”


4 When I heard these words, I sat down and wept and mourned for days, and I continued fasting and praying before the God of heaven.
5 And I said, “O LORD, God of heaven, the great and awesome God, who keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love Him and keep His commandments,
6 let Your ear be attentive and Your eyes open, to hear the prayer of Your servant that I now pray before You day and night for the sons of Israel Your servants, confessing the sins of the sons of Israel which we have sinned against You. Both I and my father’s house have sinned.
7 We have acted very corruptly against You and have not kept the commandments, the statutes, and the ordinances that You commanded Your servant Moses.
8 Remember the word that You commanded Your servant Moses, saying, ‘If you are unfaithful, I will scatter you among the nations,
9 but if you return to Me and keep My commandments and do them, though your outcasts are at the farthest part of heaven, I will gather them from there and bring them to the place that I have chosen to make My name dwell there.’
10 These are Your servants and Your people, whom You have redeemed by Your great power and by Your strong hand.
11 O Lord, let Your ear be attentive to the prayer of Your servant and to the prayer of Your servants who delight to fear Your name, and grant success to Your servant today, and give him mercy in the sight of this man.”


Now I was cupbearer to the king.




Chapter 2


1 In the month of Nisan, in the twentieth year of King Artaxerxes, when wine was before him, I took up the wine and gave it to the king. Now I had not been sad in his presence before.
2 And the king said to me, “Why is your face sad, since you are not sick? This is nothing but sorrow of heart.” Then I was very much afraid.
3 I said to the king, “May the king live forever! Why should my face not be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ graves, lies in ruins, and its gates have been consumed by fire?”
4 Then the king said to me, “What are you requesting?” So I prayed to the God of heaven.
5 And I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, and if your servant has found favor before you, send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers’ graves, that I may rebuild it.”
6 And the king said to me (the queen was sitting beside him) “How long will your journey be, and when will you return?” So it pleased the king to send me, and I gave him a time.
7 And I said to the king, “If it pleases the king, let letters be given to me for the governors of the province Beyond the River, that they may let me pass through until I come to Judah,
8 and a letter to Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the fortress that belongs to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter.” And the king granted me what I asked, for the good hand of my God was upon me.


9 Then I came to the governors of the province Beyond the River and gave them the king’s letters. Now the king had sent with me officers of the army and horsemen.
10 But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite servant heard of it, it displeased them greatly that someone had come to seek the welfare of the sons of Israel.


11 So I came to Jerusalem and was there for three days.
12 Then I arose in the night, I and a few men with me. I told no one what my God had put into my heart to do for Jerusalem. There was no animal with me except the one on which I rode.
13 I went out by night by the Valley Gate, toward the Dragon Spring and to the Dung Gate, and I inspected the walls of Jerusalem that were broken down and its gates that had been consumed by fire.
14 Then I went on to the Fountain Gate and to the King’s Pool, but there was no place for the animal that was under me to pass.
15 So I went up by night along the valley and inspected the wall, and I turned back and entered by the Valley Gate, and so returned.
16 And the officials did not know where I had gone or what I was doing, and I had not yet told the Jews, the priests, the nobles, the officials, or the rest who were to do the work.


17 Then I said to them, “You see the trouble we are in, how Jerusalem lies in ruins and its gates are burned with fire. Come, let us rebuild the wall of Jerusalem, that we may no longer be a reproach.”
18 And I told them of the hand of my God that had been good upon me, and also of the words that the king had spoken to me. And they said, “Let us rise up and build.” So they strengthened their hands for the good work.


19 But when Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Ammonite servant and Geshem the Arabian heard of it, they mocked us and despised us and said, “What is this thing that you are doing? Are you rebelling against the king?”
20 Then I answered them and said to them, “The God of heaven will make us prosper, and we His servants will arise and build, but you have no portion or right or memorial in Jerusalem.”




Chapter 3


1 Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers the priests, and they built the Sheep Gate. They consecrated it and set up its doors; they consecrated it as far as the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the Tower of Hananel.
2 Next to him the men of Jericho built, and next to them Zaccur son of Imri built.


3 The sons of Hassenaah built the Fish Gate; they laid its beams and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
4 Next to them Meremoth son of Uriah son of Hakkoz made repairs. Next to them Meshullam son of Berechiah son of Meshezabel made repairs, and next to them Zadok son of Baana made repairs.
5 Next to them the Tekoites made repairs, but their nobles did not put their shoulders to the work of their Lord.


6 Joiada son of Paseah and Meshullam son of Besodeiah repaired the Old Gate; they laid its beams and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
7 Next to them Melatiah the Gibeonite and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah who were under the authority of the governor of the province Beyond the River, made repairs.
8 Next to them Uzziel son of Harhaiah, a goldsmith, made repairs. Next to him Hananiah, one of the perfumers, made repairs, and they restored Jerusalem as far as the Broad Wall.
9 Next to them Rephaiah son of Hur, ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, made repairs.
10 Next to them Jedaiah son of Harumaph made repairs opposite his own house, and next to him Hattush son of Hashabneiah made repairs.
11 Malchijah son of Harim and Hasshub son of Pahath-moab repaired another section and the Tower of the Ovens.
12 Next to him Shallum son of Hallohesh, ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, made repairs—he and his daughters.


13 Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah repaired the Valley Gate; they rebuilt it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars, and repaired a thousand cubits of the wall to the Dung Gate.
14 Malchijah son of Rechab, ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem, repaired the Dung Gate; he rebuilt it and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars.
15 Shallun son of Col-hozeh, ruler of the district of Mizpah, repaired the Fountain Gate; he rebuilt it, covered it, and set up its doors, its bolts, and its bars. He also built the wall of the Pool of Shelah by the King’s Garden, as far as the stairs that go down from the City of David.
16 After him Nehemiah son of Azbuk, ruler of half the district of Beth-zur, made repairs up to a point opposite the tombs of David, as far as the artificial pool and the house of the mighty men.


17 After him the Levites made repairs: Rehum son of Bani; next to him Hashabiah, ruler of half the district of Keilah, made repairs for his district.
18 After him their brothers made repairs: Binnui son of Henadad, ruler of half the district of Keilah.
19 Next to him Ezer son of Jeshua, ruler of Mizpah, repaired another section opposite the ascent to the armory at the corner.
20 After him Baruch son of Zabbai eagerly repaired another section, from the corner to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
21 After him Meremoth son of Uriah son of Hakkoz repaired another section from the door of the house of Eliashib to the end of the house of Eliashib.


22 After him the priests, the men of the surrounding region, made repairs.
23 After them Benjamin and Hasshub made repairs opposite their house; after them Azariah son of Maaseiah son of Ananiah made repairs beside his own house.
24 After him Binnui son of Henadad repaired another section, from the house of Azariah to the corner and to the buttress.
25 Palal son of Uzai repaired opposite the corner and the tower projecting from the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah son of Parosh made repairs.
26 Now the temple servants were living on the Ophel. They made repairs up to a point opposite the Water Gate on the east and the projecting tower.
27 After them the Tekoites repaired another section, opposite the great projecting tower and as far as the wall of the Ophel.


28 Above the Horse Gate the priests made repairs, each opposite his own house.
29 After them Zadok son of Immer made repairs opposite his house. After him Shemaiah son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the East Gate, made repairs.
30 After him Hananiah son of Shelemiah and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph repaired another section. After him Meshullam son of Berechiah made repairs opposite his chamber.
31 After him Malchijah, one of the goldsmiths, repaired as far as the house of the temple servants and of the merchants, opposite the Muster Gate, and to the upper chamber of the corner.
32 Between the upper chamber of the corner and the Sheep Gate the goldsmiths and the merchants made repairs.




Chapter 4


1 When Sanballat heard that we were rebuilding the wall, he was angry and greatly enraged, and he mocked the Jews.
2 And he spoke before his brothers and the army of Samaria and said, “What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they restore it for themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish it in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubble, burned as they are?”
3 Now Tobiah the Ammonite was beside him, and he said, “Yes, what they are building—if a fox goes up on it, he will break down their stone wall!”


4 Hear, O our God, for we are despised. Turn back their reproach on their own head and give them over to be plundered in a land of captivity.
5 Do not cover their guilt, and do not let their sin be blotted out from before You, for they have provoked You to anger before the builders.


6 So we built the wall, and all the wall was joined together to half its height, for the people had a mind to work.


7 But when Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabs, the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem was going forward and that the gaps were beginning to be closed, they were very angry.
8 And they all conspired together to come and fight against Jerusalem and to cause confusion in it.
9 But we prayed to our God, and we set a guard as protection against them day and night.


10 Then in Judah it was said,
“The strength of the burden bearers fails,
and there is much rubble;
we are not able to rebuild the wall.”


11 And our adversaries said, “They will not know or see until we come among them and kill them and cause the work to cease.”
12 When the Jews who lived near them came, they said to us ten times from every place, “You must return to us.”


13 So I stationed men at the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the open places, and I set the people by families, with their swords, their spears, and their bows.
14 And I looked and rose up and said to the nobles, to the officials, and to the rest of the people, “Do not be afraid of them. Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight for your brothers, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your houses.”


15 When our enemies heard that their plan had been known to us and that God had frustrated it, we all returned to the wall, each to his work.
16 From that day on, half of my servants worked on construction, and half held the spears, the shields, the bows, and the coats of mail, and the officers stood behind all the house of Judah
17 who were building the wall. Those who carried burdens loaded themselves in such a way that each labored on the work with one hand and held his weapon with the other.
18 And each of the builders had his sword strapped at his side while he built. The man who sounded the trumpet was beside me.


19 And I said to the nobles and to the officials and to the rest of the people, “The work is great and spread out, and we are separated on the wall, far from one another.
20 Wherever you hear the sound of the trumpet, rally to us there. Our God will fight for us.”


21 So we labored at the work, and half of them held the spears from the break of dawn until the stars came out.
22 I also said to the people at that time, “Let every man and his servant spend the night within Jerusalem, that they may be a guard for us by night and may labor by day.”
23 So neither I nor my brothers nor my servants nor the men of the guard who followed me took off our clothes; each kept his weapon even when taking water.




Chapter 5


1 Then there arose a great outcry of the people and of their wives against their Jewish brothers.
2 For there were those who said, “We, our sons, and our daughters are many; therefore we must get grain so that we may eat and live.”
3 There were also those who said, “We are mortgaging our fields, our vineyards, and our houses to get grain because of the famine.”
4 And there were those who said, “We have borrowed money for the king’s tax on our fields and our vineyards.
5 Now our flesh is as the flesh of our brothers, our children as their children; yet we are forcing our sons and our daughters to be slaves, and some of our daughters have already been enslaved, but we are powerless, for our fields and our vineyards belong to others.”


6 I was very angry when I heard their outcry and these words.
7 I consulted with myself, and I brought charges against the nobles and the officials. I said to them, “You are exacting interest, each from his brother.” And I held a great assembly against them
8 and said to them, “We, as far as we are able, have bought back our Jewish brothers who were sold to the nations, but you even sell your brothers so that they must be sold back to us!” They were silent and could not find a word to say.
9 So I said, “The thing that you are doing is not good. Should you not walk in the fear of our God to prevent the reproach of the nations, our enemies?
10 Moreover, I and my brothers and my servants are lending them money and grain. Let us stop this taking of interest.
11 Return to them this very day their fields, their vineyards, their olive groves, and their houses, and the hundredth part of the money, the grain, the new wine, and the oil that you have been exacting from them.”
12 Then they said, “We will restore these and require nothing from them. We will do as you say.” So I called the priests and made them swear to do according to this promise.
13 I also shook out the fold of my garment and said, “So may God shake out every man from his house and from his labor who does not perform this promise; thus may he be shaken out and emptied.” And all the assembly said, “Amen,” and they praised the LORD. And the people did according to this promise.


14 Moreover, from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year to the thirty-second year of King Artaxerxes, twelve years, neither I nor my brothers ate the food allowance of the governor.
15 The former governors who were before me laid heavy burdens on the people and took from them forty shekels of silver besides bread and wine. Even their servants lorded it over the people, but I did not do so, because of the fear of God.
16 I also devoted myself to the work on this wall, and we acquired no land, and all my servants were gathered there for the work.
17 Moreover, there were at my table a hundred fifty men, Jews and officials, besides those who came to us from the nations that were around us.
18 Now what was prepared for each day was one ox and six choice sheep; also birds were prepared for me, and once in ten days an abundance of all kinds of wine. Yet for all this I did not demand the food allowance of the governor, because the service was heavy on this people.
19 Remember for my good, O my God, all that I have done for this people.




Chapter 6


1 When Sanballat, Tobiah, Geshem the Arabian, and the rest of our enemies heard that I had built the wall and that no breach remained in it—though at that time I had not set up the doors in the gates—
2 Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying, “Come, let us meet together in one of the villages in the plain of Ono.” But they intended to harm me.
3 So I sent messengers to them, saying, “I am doing a great work and cannot come down. Why should the work cease while I leave it and come down to you?”
4 They sent to me four times in this way, and I answered them in the same manner.


5 Then Sanballat sent his servant to me in the same way a fifth time, with an open letter in his hand.
6 In it was written, “It is reported among the nations—and Geshem also says it—that you and the Jews intend to rebel; therefore you are building the wall, and according to these reports you wish to become their king.
7 And you have also set up prophets to proclaim concerning you in Jerusalem, saying, ‘There is a king in Judah!’ Now the king will hear of these reports. So come now, let us take counsel together.”
8 Then I sent to him, saying, “There are no such things as you say being done, for you are inventing them in your own heart.”
9 For they all wanted to frighten us, thinking, “Their hands will drop from the work, and it will not be done.” But now, O God, strengthen my hands.


10 Now I went into the house of Shemaiah son of Delaiah son of Mehetabel, who was shut in, and he said, “Let us meet together in the house of God, inside the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple, for they are coming to kill you; by night they are coming to kill you.”
11 But I said, “Should a man like me flee? And who such as I could go into the temple and live? I will not go in.”
12 And I understood that God had not sent him, but that he had spoken this prophecy against me because Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
13 He was hired that I might be afraid and act in this way and sin, and so they could give me a bad name in order to reproach me.
14 Remember Tobiah and Sanballat, O my God, according to these things that they did, and also the prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the prophets who were trying to frighten me.


15 So the wall was finished on the twenty-fifth day of the month of Elul, in fifty-two days.
16 And when all our enemies heard of it, all the nations around us were afraid and fell greatly in their own eyes, for they perceived that this work had been accomplished with the help of our God.


17 Moreover, in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters to Tobiah, and Tobiah’s letters came to them.
18 For many in Judah were bound to him by oath, because he was son-in-law to Shecaniah son of Arah, and his son Jehohanan had married the daughter of Meshullam son of Berechiah.
19 They also spoke of his good deeds before me and reported my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to frighten me.




Chapter 7


1 When the wall had been built and I had set up the doors, and the gatekeepers, the singers, and the Levites had been appointed,
2 I put in charge of Jerusalem my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the commander of the fortress, for he was a faithful man and feared God more than many.
3 And I said to them, “Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun is hot, and while they are standing guard let them shut and bar the doors. Appoint guards from among the inhabitants of Jerusalem, each at his watch post and each opposite his own house.”


4 Now the city was wide and large, but the people in it were few, and no houses had been rebuilt.
5 Then my God put it into my heart to assemble the nobles and the officials and the people to be registered by genealogy. And I found the book of the genealogy of those who came up at the first, and I found written in it:


6 These are the sons of the province who came up out of the captivity of the exiles whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, each to his own city.
7 They came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum, and Baanah.


The number of the men of the people of Israel:
8 the sons of Parosh, two thousand one hundred seventy-two.
9 The sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy-two.
10 The sons of Arah, six hundred fifty-two.
11 The sons of Pahath-moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred eighteen.
12 The sons of Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.
13 The sons of Zattu, eight hundred forty-five.
14 The sons of Zaccai, seven hundred sixty.
15 The sons of Binnui, six hundred forty-eight.
16 The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty-eight.
17 The sons of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two.
18 The sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-seven.
19 The sons of Bigvai, two thousand sixty-seven.
20 The sons of Adin, six hundred fifty-five.
21 The sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight.
22 The sons of Hashum, three hundred twenty-eight.
23 The sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty-four.
24 The sons of Hariph, one hundred twelve.
25 The sons of Gibeon, ninety-five.


26 The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, one hundred eighty-eight.
27 The men of Anathoth, one hundred twenty-eight.
28 The men of Beth-azmaveth, forty-two.
29 The men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three.
30 The men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty-one.
31 The men of Michmas, one hundred twenty-two.
32 The men of Bethel and Ai, one hundred twenty-three.
33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty-two.
34 The sons of the other Elam, one thousand two hundred fifty-four.
35 The sons of Harim, three hundred twenty.
36 The sons of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.
37 The sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty-one.
38 The sons of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred thirty.


39 The priests: the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three.
40 The sons of Immer, one thousand fifty-two.
41 The sons of Pashhur, one thousand two hundred forty-seven.
42 The sons of Harim, one thousand seventeen.


43 The Levites: the sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodevah, seventy-four.


44 The singers: the sons of Asaph, one hundred forty-eight.


45 The gatekeepers: the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, one hundred thirty-eight.


46 The temple servants: the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth,
47 the sons of Keros, the sons of Sia, the sons of Padon,
48 the sons of Lebanah, the sons of Hagabah, the sons of Shalmai,
49 the sons of Hanan, the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar,
50 the sons of Reaiah, the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda,
51 the sons of Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah,
52 the sons of Besai, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephushesim,
53 the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur,
54 the sons of Bazlith, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha,
55 the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah,
56 the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.


57 The sons of Solomon’s servants: the sons of Sotai, the sons of Sophereth, the sons of Perida,
58 the sons of Jaala, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel,
59 the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Amon.


60 All the temple servants and the sons of Solomon’s servants were three hundred ninety-two.


61 And these were the ones who came up from Tel-melah, Tel-harsha, Cherub, Addon, and Immer, but they could not prove their fathers’ houses nor their descent, whether they were of Israel:
62 the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred forty-two.
63 And of the priests: the sons of Hobaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai, who had taken a wife from the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite and was called by their name.
64 These sought their registration among those recorded in the genealogies, but it was not found, so they were excluded from the priesthood as unclean.
65 And the governor told them that they were not to eat of the most holy things until a priest should arise with Urim and Thummim.


66 The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred sixty,
67 besides their male and female servants, who were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven, and they had two hundred forty-five singers, male and female.
68 Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six, their mules two hundred forty-five,
69 their camels four hundred thirty-five, and their donkeys six thousand seven hundred twenty.


70 Now some of the heads of fathers’ houses gave to the work. The governor gave to the treasury one thousand darics of gold, fifty bowls, and five hundred thirty priestly garments.
71 And some of the heads of fathers’ houses gave to the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of gold and two thousand two hundred minas of silver.
72 And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, two thousand minas of silver, and sixty-seven priestly garments.


73 So the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, some of the people, the temple servants, and all Israel lived in their cities.


When the seventh month came, the sons of Israel were in their cities.




Chapter 8


1 All the people gathered as one man in the square before the Water Gate. They asked Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the LORD had commanded Israel.
2 So Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly, both men and women and all who could understand what they heard, on the first day of the seventh month.
3 And he read from it facing the square before the Water Gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women and those who could understand. And the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the law.
4 And Ezra the scribe stood on a wooden platform that had been made for the purpose. And beside him stood Mattithiah, Shema, Anaiah, Uriah, Hilkiah, and Maaseiah on his right hand; and on his left hand, Pedaiah, Mishael, Malchijah, Hashum, Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
5 And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people, for he was above all the people; and as he opened it, all the people stood.
6 And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God; and all the people answered, “Amen, Amen,” lifting up their hands. And they bowed their heads and worshiped the LORD with their faces to the ground.
7 Also Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, the Levites, helped the people to understand the law, while the people remained in their places.
8 They read from the book, from the law of God, clearly, and they gave the sense, so that the people understood the reading.


9 And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest and scribe, and the Levites who taught the people said to all the people, “This day is holy to the LORD your God; do not mourn or weep.” For all the people wept as they heard the words of the law.
10 Then he said to them, “Go your way. Eat the fat and drink sweet wine and send portions to anyone who has nothing ready, for this day is holy to our LORD. And do not be grieved, for the joy of the LORD is your strength.”
11 So the Levites calmed all the people, saying, “Be quiet, for this day is holy; do not be grieved.”
12 And all the people went their way to eat and drink and to send portions and to make great rejoicing, because they had understood the words that were declared to them.


13 On the second day the heads of fathers' houses of all the people, with the priests and Levites, came together to Ezra the scribe in order to study the words of the law.
14 And they found it written in the law that the LORD had commanded by Moses that the people of Israel should dwell in booths during the feast of the seventh month,
15 and that they should proclaim it and publish it in all their towns and in Jerusalem, “Go out to the hills and bring branches of olive, wild olive, myrtle, palm, and other leafy trees to make booths, as it is written.”
16 So the people went out and brought them and made booths for themselves, each on his roof, and in their courts and in the courts of the house of God, and in the square at the Water Gate and in the square at the Gate of Ephraim.
17 And all the assembly of those who had returned from the captivity made booths and lived in the booths. For from the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day the people of Israel had not done so. And there was very great rejoicing.
18 And day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read from the book of the law of God. They kept the feast seven days, and on the eighth day there was a solemn assembly, according to the rule.




Chapter 9


1 On the twenty-fourth day of this month, the Israelites assembled, fasting and wearing sackcloth and putting dust on their heads.
2 And the Israelites separated themselves from all foreigners and stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their fathers.
3 And they stood in their place and read from the book of the law of the LORD their God for a quarter of the day, and for another quarter they confessed and worshiped the LORD their God.
4 Then the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, “Stand up and bless the LORD your God forever and ever! Blessed be Your glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise!”
5 And Ezra said, “Bless the LORD, the God of our fathers, and let His name be exalted forever and ever, and let the glory of His kingdom be exalted above all.

6 You are the LORD, You alone; You have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all that is on it, the seas and all that is in them; and You preserve them all, and the host of heaven worships You.
7 You are the LORD, the God who chose Abram and brought him out of Ur of the Chaldeans and gave him the name Abraham;
8 and You found his heart faithful before You, and You made a covenant with him to give to his offspring the land of the Canaanite, Hittite, Amorite, Perizzite, Jebusite, and Girgashite. And You have fulfilled Your words, for You are righteous.
9 And You saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and You heard their cry at the Red Sea;
10 and You showed signs and wonders against Pharaoh and all his servants and all the people of his land, for You knew that they acted arrogantly against them, and You made a name for Yourself, as it is this day.
11 And You divided the sea before them, so that they passed through the midst of it, but You cast their pursuers into the depths, as a stone into mighty waters.
12 And in a pillar of cloud You led them by day and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light on the way in which they should go.
13 You came down on Mount Sinai and spoke with them from heaven and gave them just ordinances and true laws, good statutes and commandments,
14 And You made known to them Your holy Sabbath and commanded them precepts, statutes, and a law by Moses Your servant.
15 And You gave them bread from heaven for their hunger and brought water for them out of the rock for their thirst and told them to go in and take possession of the land which You had sworn to give them.


16 But they and our fathers acted arrogantly, stiffening their neck and not obeying Your commandments; they refused to obey and were not mindful of Your wonders that You performed among them.
17 But You are a God ready to forgive, gracious and merciful, slow to anger and abundant in steadfast love, and You did not forsake them.
18 Even when they made a golden calf and said, ‘This is your god who brought you out of Egypt,’ and committed great blasphemies,
19 yet You in Your great mercy did not forsake them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from them by day, to lead them in the way, nor the pillar of fire by night, to give them light, to go in the way that they should go.
20 You gave Your good Spirit to instruct them and did not withhold manna from their mouth and gave them water for their thirst.
21 Forty years You sustained them in the wilderness; they lacked nothing, their clothes did not wear out, and their feet did not swell.

22 And You gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted to them lands, so that they might take possession of the land of Sihon, king of Heshbon, and the land of Og, king of Bashan.
23 And their descendants went in and possessed the land, and You subdued before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hand with their kings and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
24 And they took fortified cities and a rich land, and they lived in it and took possession of houses filled with all good things, cisterns already dug, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. And they ate and were filled and became fat and delighted themselves in Your great goodness.
25 Nevertheless, they were disobedient and rebelled against You and cast Your law behind their backs and killed Your prophets, who testified against them, to bring upon them great wrath.
26 Therefore You delivered them into the hand of their enemies, who oppressed them. And in the time of their trouble, when they cried to You, You heard them from heaven, and according to Your great mercy You gave them saviors who saved them from the hand of their enemies.


27 Yet they acted arrogantly and sinned against You and rebelled in Your commandments. They turned aside and spoke against Your laws, whose keeping would have given them life, and they turned back and killed Your prophets, who testified against them, to bring upon them great wrath.
28 Therefore You delivered them into the hand of the peoples of the lands, and those who hated them ruled over them. And in the time of their trouble, they cried to You, and You heard them from heaven, and according to Your great mercy You gave them saviors, who saved them from the hand of those who hated them.
29 But after they had rest, they again did evil before You. Therefore, You left them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had dominion over them. Yet in the time of their trouble, they cried to You, and You heard from heaven, and many times You delivered them according to Your mercy.
30 And You warned them to return to Your law, but they acted arrogantly and did not obey Your commandments, but sinned against Your judgments, which, if a man does them, he shall live by them, and they turned a stubborn shoulder and stiffened their neck and would not hear.
31 Yet in Your great mercy You did not utterly consume them or forsake them, for You are a God ready to forgive, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in steadfast love, and You did not forsake them.


32 Indeed, many times You delivered them according to Your mercy, and they again acted arrogantly and rebelled against You. And You left them in the hand of their enemies, so that they ruled over them.
33 But in the time of their trouble, when they cried to You, You heard them from heaven, and according to Your great mercy You gave them saviors, who saved them from the hand of their enemies.
34 And You multiplied Your wondrous works and Your deeds of power against them, and You delivered them into the hand of those who hated them.
35 And You gave them kingdoms and peoples and allotted to them lands, so that they might take possession of the land of Sihon, king of Heshbon, and the land of Og, king of Bashan.
36 And their descendants went in and possessed the land, and You subdued before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hand with their kings and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
37 And they took fortified cities and a rich land, and they lived in it and took possession of houses filled with all good things, cisterns already dug, vineyards, olive groves, and fruit trees in abundance. And they ate and were filled and became fat and delighted themselves in Your great goodness.


38 Nevertheless, they were disobedient and rebelled against You and cast Your law behind their backs and killed Your prophets, who testified against them, to bring upon them great wrath.




Chapter 10


1 On the sealed document were the names: Nehemiah the governor, son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah,
2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
3 Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,
4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
5 Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
7 Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah—these were the priests.


9 And the Levites: Jeshua son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel;
10 and their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
11 Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
12 Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
13 Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.


14 The chiefs of the people: Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
17 Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
18 Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
21 Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
24 Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
26 Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah.


28 The rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the gatekeepers, the singers, the temple servants, and all who had separated themselves from the nations of the lands to the Law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, everyone who had knowledge and understanding,
29 joined with their brothers, their nobles, and entered into a curse and an oath to walk in God’s Law that was given through Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of the LORD our Lord and His ordinances and His statutes.


30 We will not give our daughters to the peoples of the land or take their daughters for our sons.
31 If the peoples of the land bring goods or any grain on the Sabbath day to sell, we will not buy from them on the Sabbath or on a holy day. And we will forego the crops of the seventh year and every debt.


32 We also take upon ourselves the obligation to give yearly a third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God:
33 for the showbread, the regular grain offering, the regular burnt offering, the Sabbaths, the new moons, the appointed feasts, the holy things, and the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.


34 We, the priests, the Levites, and the people, have cast lots for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God according to our fathers’ houses, at appointed times year by year, to burn on the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the Law.
35 We obligate ourselves to bring the firstfruits of our ground and the firstfruits of all fruit of every tree, year by year, to the house of the LORD,
36 also to bring to the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the house of our God, the firstborn of our sons and of our cattle, as it is written in the Law, and the firstborn of our herds and of our flocks.
37 We will bring the first of our dough and our contributions, the fruit of every tree, the new wine, and the oil to the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God, and the tithes of our ground to the Levites, for the Levites collect the tithes in all the towns where we work.
38 A priest, the son of Aaron, shall be with the Levites when the Levites receive tithes. And the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the chambers of the storehouse.
39 For the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi shall bring the contribution of grain, wine, and oil to the chambers where the vessels of the sanctuary are, as well as the priests who minister, the gatekeepers, and the singers.


We will not neglect the house of our God.




Chapter 11


1 And the leaders of the people dwelt in Jerusalem; the rest of the people cast lots to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem, the holy city, and nine parts in the other cities.
2 And the people blessed all the men who willingly offered to dwell in Jerusalem.


3 Now these are the chiefs of the province who dwelt in Jerusalem; but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their cities, to wit, Israelites, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinim, and the children of Solomon's servants.
4 And in Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah: Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the children of Perez;
5 and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Haziah, the son of Adiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of Shiloni.
6 All the sons of Perez who dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred threescore and eight valiant men.


7 And these are the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.
8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight.
9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son of Senuah was second over the city.


10 Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin.
11 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God.
12 And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchiah.
13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and two: and Amashai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer.
14 And their brethren, mighty men of valour, a hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer was Zabdiel the son of Haggedolim.


15 Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni.
16 And Shabbethai and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God.
17 And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
18 All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and four.


19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two.
20 And the residue of Israel, of the priests and the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance.
21 But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over the Nethinims.


22 The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha, of the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house of God.
23 For it was the king's commandment concerning them, that a certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day.
24 And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.


25 And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of Judah dwelt at Kirjath-arba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon, and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages thereof,
26 and at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Beth-phelet,
27 and at Hazar-shual, and at Beersheba, and in the villages thereof,
28 and at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,
29 and at En-rimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth,
30 Zanoah, Adullam, and in their villages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at Azekah, and in the villages thereof. And they dwelt from Beer-sheba unto the valley of Hinnom.
31 The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and Aija, and Bethel, and in their villages,
32 and at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
35 Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.
36 And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin.




Chapter 12


1 These are the priests and the Levites who came up with Zerubbabel son of Shealtiel and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
3 Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
4 Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,
5 Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
6 Shemaiah, Joiarib, Jedaiah,
7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the heads of the priests and of their brothers in the days of Jeshua.


8 And the Levites were Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who with his brothers was in charge of the songs of thanksgiving.
9 And Bakbukiah and Unni, their brothers, stood opposite them in the service divisions.


10 Jeshua fathered Joiakim, Joiakim fathered Eliashib, Eliashib fathered Joiada,
11 Joiada fathered Jonathan, and Jonathan fathered Jaddua.


12 In the days of Joiakim, the priests, heads of fathers’ houses, were: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah;
13 of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan;
14 of Malluchi, Jonathan; of Shebaniah, Joseph;
15 of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai;
16 of Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam;
17 of Abijah, Zichri; of Miniamin and Moadiah, Piltai;
18 of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah, Jehonathan;
19 of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi;
20 of Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber;
21 of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of Jedaiah, Nethanel.


22 In the days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan, and Jaddua, the Levites were recorded as heads of fathers’ houses, and so were the priests, during the reign of Darius the Persian.
23 The sons of Levi, heads of fathers’ houses, were recorded in the Book of the Chronicles up to the days of Johanan son of Eliashib.
24 And the heads of the Levites were Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua son of Kadmiel, with their brothers who stood opposite them to praise and to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, division corresponding to division.
25 Mattaniah, Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, and Akkub were gatekeepers standing guard at the storerooms by the gates.
26 These were in the days of Joiakim son of Jeshua, son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor and of Ezra the priest, the scribe.


27 At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought out the Levites from all their places to bring them to Jerusalem to celebrate the dedication with joy, with thanksgiving and singing, with cymbals, harps, and lyres.
28 And the sons of the singers gathered together from the district around Jerusalem and from the villages of the Netophathites,
29 and from Beth-gilgal and from the region of Geba and Azmaveth, for the singers had built themselves villages around Jerusalem.
30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people and the gates and the wall.


31 Then I brought up the leaders of Judah onto the wall, and appointed two great choirs that gave thanks and went in procession. One went to the right on the wall toward the Dung Gate,
32 and after them went Hoshaiah and half of the leaders of Judah,
33 and Azariah, Ezra, Meshullam,
34 Judah, Benjamin, Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,
35 and some of the priests’ sons with trumpets—Zechariah son of Jonathan, son of Shemaiah, son of Mattaniah, son of Micaiah, son of Zaccur, son of Asaph—
36 and his brothers, Shemaiah, Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, Judah, and Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God. And Ezra the scribe went before them.
37 At the Fountain Gate they went up straight before them by the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of the wall above the house of David, to the Water Gate on the east.


38 The other choir of those who gave thanks went to the left, and I followed them with half of the people, on the wall, above the Tower of the Ovens, to the Broad Wall,
39 and above the Gate of Ephraim, and by the Old Gate, and by the Fish Gate, and the Tower of Hananel, and the Tower of the Hundred, as far as the Sheep Gate. And they stopped at the Gate of the Guard.
40 So both choirs of those who gave thanks stood in the house of God, and I and half of the officials with me,
41 and the priests Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah with trumpets,
42 and Maaseiah, Shemaiah, Eleazar, Uzzi, Jehohanan, Malchijah, Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang with Jezrahiah as their leader.


43 And they offered great sacrifices that day and rejoiced, for God had made them rejoice with great joy. The women also and the children rejoiced, and the joy of Jerusalem was heard far away.


44 On that day men were appointed over the storerooms for the contributions, the firstfruits, and the tithes, to gather into them from the fields of the cities the portions required by the Law for the priests and the Levites. For Judah rejoiced over the priests and the Levites who ministered.
45 And they performed the service of their God and the service of purification, as did the singers and the gatekeepers, according to the command of David and Solomon, his son.
46 For long ago, in the days of David and Asaph, there had been directors of the singers and songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
47 And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel and in the days of Nehemiah gave the portions due the singers and the gatekeepers, as each day required, and they set apart the consecrated portion for the Levites, and the Levites set apart the consecrated portion for the sons of Aaron.




Chapter 13


1 On that day they read from the Book of Moses in the hearing of the people, and in it was found written that no Ammonite or Moabite should ever enter the assembly of God,
2 because they did not meet the sons of Israel with bread and water but hired Balaam against them to curse them. Yet our God turned the curse into a blessing.
3 When they heard the Law, they separated all those of mixed ancestry from Israel.


4 Before this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God and who was related to Tobiah,
5 had prepared for him a large room where they had formerly stored the grain offering, the frankincense, the vessels, and the tithes of grain, wine, and oil, which were commanded to be given to the Levites, the singers, and the gatekeepers, and the contributions for the priests.
6 But during all this I was not in Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I had gone to the king. After some time I asked leave of the king,
7 and I came to Jerusalem and discovered the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah in preparing for him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.
8 I was very angry, and I threw all the household goods of Tobiah out of the chamber.
9 Then I gave orders, and they cleansed the chambers, and I brought back the vessels of the house of God, the grain offering, and the frankincense.


10 I also found that the portions of the Levites had not been given to them, so that the Levites and the singers who performed the service had gone back each to his own field.
11 So I contended with the officials and said, “Why is the house of God neglected?” Then I gathered them together and stationed them at their posts.
12 Then all Judah brought the tithe of the grain, wine, and oil into the storehouses.
13 And I appointed treasurers over the storehouses: Shelemiah the priest, Zadok the scribe, and Pedaiah of the Levites, and as their assistant Hanan son of Zaccur, son of Mattaniah, for they were considered faithful, and their task was to distribute to their brothers.
14 Remember me for this, O my God, and do not blot out my faithful deeds that I have done for the house of my God and for its service.


15 In those days I saw in Judah men treading winepresses on the Sabbath and bringing in heaps of grain and loading them on donkeys, and also wine, grapes, figs, and all kinds of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day. So I warned them on the day they sold food.
16 Men of Tyre also lived there, who brought in fish and all kinds of merchandise and sold them on the Sabbath to the men of Judah, in Jerusalem itself.
17 Then I contended with the nobles of Judah and said to them, “What is this evil thing that you are doing, profaning the Sabbath day?
18 Did not your fathers act in this way, and did not our God bring all this disaster on us and on this city? Yet you are adding to the wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath!”
19 As soon as it began to grow dark at the gates of Jerusalem before the Sabbath, I commanded that the doors be shut and gave orders that they should not be opened until after the Sabbath. I stationed some of my servants at the gates, so that no burden should be brought in on the Sabbath day.
20 Then the merchants and sellers of all kinds of wares spent the night outside Jerusalem once or twice,
21 but I warned them and said to them, “Why do you spend the night before the wall? If you do so again, I will lay hands on you.” From that time on they did not come on the Sabbath.
22 Then I commanded the Levites that they should purify themselves and come and guard the gates, to keep the Sabbath day holy. Remember this also in my favor, O my God, and spare me according to the greatness of Your steadfast love.


23 In those days I also saw Jews who had married women of Ashdod, Ammon, and Moab.
24 Half of their children spoke the language of Ashdod or the language of other nations but could not speak the language of Judah.
25 So I contended with them and cursed them and struck some of them and pulled out their hair. I made them swear by God, saying, “You shall not give your daughters to their sons or take their daughters for your sons or for yourselves.
26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin on account of such women? Among the many nations there was no king like him, and he was beloved by his God, and God made him king over all Israel. Yet foreign women caused even him to sin.
27 Shall we then hear of you doing all this great evil and acting unfaithfully against our God by marrying foreign women?”
28 And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law of Sanballat the Horonite, so I drove him away from me.
29 Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood and the covenant of the priesthood and the Levites.


30 So I purified them from everything foreign, and I appointed duties for the priests and the Levites, each to his own work.
31 And I arranged for the supply of wood at appointed times and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.