Job


Chapter 1


1 There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job, and that man was blameless and upright, fearing God and turning away from evil.
2 Seven sons and three daughters were born to him.
3 His possessions were seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred female donkeys, and a very large household; and that man was greater than all the men of the east.
4 His sons used to go and hold a feast in the house of each one on his appointed day, and they would send and invite their three sisters to eat and drink with them.
5 When the days of feasting had run their course, Job would send for them and consecrate them; he would rise early in the morning and offer burnt offerings according to the number of them all, for Job said, “Perhaps my sons have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.” Thus Job did continually.


6 Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and the Adversary also came among them.
7 The LORD said to the Adversary, “From where do you come?” Then the Adversary answered the LORD and said, “From roaming about on the earth and walking around on it.”
8 The LORD said to the Adversary, “Have you set your mind on My servant Job? For there is no one like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man, fearing God and turning away from evil.”
9 The Adversary answered the LORD and said, “Does Job fear God for nothing?
10 Have You not put a hedge around him, and around his house, and around all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his possessions have increased in the land.
11 But stretch out Your hand and strike all that he has, and surely he will curse You to Your face.”
12 The LORD said to the Adversary, “All that he has is in your power; only do not stretch out your hand against him.” So the Adversary went out from the presence of the LORD.


13 Now it happened on the day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house,
14 that a messenger came to Job and said, “The oxen were plowing and the donkeys were feeding beside them,
15 and the Sabeans fell upon them and took them away; they also struck down the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”
16 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “The fire of God fell from heaven and burned up the sheep and the servants and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”
17 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “The Chaldeans formed three raiding parties and made a raid on the camels and took them and struck down the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.”
18 While he was still speaking, another came and said, “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother’s house,
19 and suddenly a great wind came from across the wilderness and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young men, and they are dead; and I alone have escaped to tell you.”


20 Then Job arose and tore his robe and shaved his head, and he fell to the ground and worshiped.
21 He said,


“Naked I came from my mother’s womb,
and naked I shall return there.
The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away;
blessed be the name of the LORD.”


22 In all this Job did not sin nor charge God with wrongdoing.




Chapter 2


1 Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present themselves before the LORD, and the Adversary also came among them to present himself before the LORD.
2 The LORD said to the Adversary, “From where do you come?” The Adversary answered the LORD and said, “From roaming about on the earth and walking around on it.”
3 The LORD said to the Adversary, “Have you set your mind on My servant Job? For there is no one like him on the earth, a blameless and upright man, fearing God and turning away from evil. He still holds firmly to his integrity, though you incited Me against him to destroy him without cause.”
4 The Adversary answered the LORD and said, “Skin for skin! Indeed, all that a man has he will give for his life.
5 But stretch out Your hand now and strike his bone and his flesh, and surely he will curse You to Your face.”
6 The LORD said to the Adversary, “Behold, he is in your power; only spare his life.”


7 So the Adversary went out from the presence of the LORD and struck Job with painful boils from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head.
8 He took a potsherd to scrape himself while he sat among the ashes.
9 Then his wife said to him, “Do you still hold fast to your integrity? Curse God and die!”
10 But he said to her, “You speak as one of the foolish women would speak. Should we indeed accept good from God and not accept adversity?” In all this Job did not sin with his lips.


11 Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that had come upon him, each came from his own place—Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. They met together to come to sympathize with him and to comfort him.
12 When they lifted up their eyes from a distance, they did not recognize him, and they raised their voices and wept; each tore his robe, and they threw dust toward heaven upon their heads.
13 They sat with him on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his pain was very great.




Chapter 3


1 After this Job opened his mouth and cursed the day of his birth.
2 Job spoke and said:


3 “May the day perish on which I was born,
and the night that said, ‘A man is conceived.’
4 May that day be darkness;
may God above not seek it,
nor light shine upon it.
5 May darkness and deep shadow reclaim it;
may a cloud settle upon it;
may blackness of the day terrify it.
6 As for that night, may thick darkness seize it;
may it not rejoice among the days of the year;
may it not enter the number of the months.
7 Yes, may that night be barren;
may no joyful shout come into it.
8 Let those curse it who curse the day,
who are ready to rouse Leviathan.
9 May the stars of its dawn be dark;
may it hope for light and have none,
nor see the eyelids of the morning,
10 because it did not shut the doors of my mother’s womb,
nor hide trouble from my eyes.


11 Why did I not die at birth,
come forth from the womb and expire?
12 Why did knees receive me,
or why were there breasts to nurse me?
13 For now I would have lain down and been quiet;
I would have slept; then I would be at rest
14 with kings and counselors of the earth,
who rebuilt ruins for themselves,
15 or with princes who had gold,
who filled their houses with silver.
16 Or like a miscarriage hidden away, I would not exist,
as infants who never saw the light.
17 There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary find rest.
18 Prisoners are at ease together;
they hear not the voice of the taskmaster.
19 The small and the great are there,
and the slave is free from his master.


20 Why is light given to him who suffers,
and life to the bitter in soul,
21 who long for death, but it does not come,
and dig for it more than for hidden treasures,
22 who rejoice exceedingly,
and are glad when they find the grave?
23 Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden,
and whom God has hedged in?
24 For my sighing comes instead of my food,
and my groanings pour out like water.
25 For what I fear comes upon me,
and what I dread befalls me.
26 I am not at ease, nor am I quiet;
I have no rest, but turmoil comes.”




Chapter 4


1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:


2 “If one ventures a word with you, will you be impatient?
Yet who can keep from speaking?
3 Yes, you have instructed many,
and you have strengthened weak hands.
4 Your words have upheld him who was stumbling,
and you have made feeble knees firm.
5 But now it has come to you, and you are weary;
it touches you, and you are dismayed.
6 Is not your fear of God your confidence,
and the integrity of your ways, your hope?


7 Remember now: who among the innocent ever perished?
Or where were the upright cut off?
8 As I have seen, those who plow iniquity
and sow trouble reap the same.
9 By the breath of God they perish,
and by the blast of His anger they are consumed.
10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion,
and the teeth of the young lions are broken.
11 The strong lion perishes for lack of prey,
and the cubs of the lioness are scattered.


12 Now a word was brought to me stealthily;
my ear received a whisper of it.
13 Amid disquieting thoughts from visions of the night,
when deep sleep falls on men,
14 dread came upon me and trembling,
which made all my bones shake.
15 Then a spirit passed before my face;
the hair of my flesh stood on end.
16 It stood still, but I could not discern its appearance;
a form was before my eyes;
there was silence, then I heard a voice:
17 ‘Can mortal man be right before God?
Can a man be pure before his Maker?
18 You will see how He puts no trust even in His servants,
and He charges His angels with error;
19 how much more those who dwell in houses of clay,
whose foundation is in the dust,
who are crushed like a moth!
20 Between morning and evening they are broken to pieces;
without anyone regarding it, they perish forever.
21 Is not their tent cord pulled up within them?
They die without wisdom.’”




Chapter 5


1 “Call now! Will anyone answer you?
And to which of the holy ones will you turn?
2 For vexation kills the fool,
and jealousy slays the simple.
3 I have seen the fool taking root,
but suddenly I cursed his dwelling.
4 His sons are far from safety;
they are crushed in the gate,
and there is no one to deliver them.
5 The hungry eat his harvest,
and take it even out of the thorns,
and the thirsty pant after his wealth.


6 For affliction does not come from the dust,
nor does trouble sprout from the ground;
7 but man is born to trouble,
as sparks fly upward.


8 But as for me, I would seek God,
and to God I would commit my cause,
9 who does great and unsearchable things,
wonders without number.
10 He gives rain on the earth
and sends water on the fields,
11 to set the lowly on high,
and those who mourn are lifted to safety.
12 He frustrates the devices of the crafty,
so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
13 He catches the wise in their own craftiness,
and the counsel of the wily is swiftly ended.
14 They meet with darkness in the daytime,
and grope at noonday as in the night.
15 But He saves the needy from the sword of their mouth,
and from the hand of the mighty.
16 So the poor have hope,
and injustice shuts its mouth.


17 How blessed is the man whom God corrects;
therefore do not despise the discipline of the Almighty.
18 For He wounds, but He also binds up;
He strikes, but His hands heal.
19 In six troubles He will deliver you;
in seven no evil shall touch you.
20 In famine He will redeem you from death,
and in war from the power of the sword.
21 You shall be hidden from the lash of the tongue,
and shall not fear destruction when it comes.
22 At destruction and famine you shall laugh,
and shall not fear the beasts of the earth.
23 For you shall have a covenant with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with you.
24 You shall know that your tent is at peace,
and you shall visit your fold and find nothing missing.
25 You shall know also that your offspring shall be many,
and your descendants like the grass of the earth.
26 You shall come to the grave in ripe old age,
like a sheaf gathered up in its season.


27 Yes, this we have searched out; it is true.
Listen to it, and know it for yourself.”




Chapter 6


1 Then Job answered and said:


2 “Oh that my grief were fully weighed,
and my calamity laid in the balances together!
3 For then it would be heavier than the sand of the seas;
therefore my words have been rash.
4 For the arrows of the Almighty are in me;
my spirit drinks their poison;
the terrors of God are arrayed against me.
5 Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass,
or does the ox low over his fodder?
6 Can that which is tasteless be eaten without salt,
or is there any flavor in the white of an egg?
7 My soul refuses to touch them;
they are loathsome food to me.


8 Oh that my request might come to pass,
and that God would grant my desire,
9 that it would please God to crush me,
that He would loose His hand and cut me off!
10 This would still be my comfort;
I would exult in pain unsparing,
that I have not denied the words of the Holy One.


11 What is my strength, that I should wait?
And what is my end, that I should be patient?
12 Is my strength the strength of stones,
or is my flesh bronze?
13 Is it not that there is no help within me,
and that deliverance is driven from me?


14 He who withholds kindness from a friend
forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
15 My brothers have dealt deceitfully like a wadi,
like the torrents of wadis that pass away,
16 which are dark because of ice,
and in which the snow hides itself.
17 When they thaw, they vanish;
when it is hot, they disappear from their place.
18 The paths of their course wind along;
they go up into the wasteland and perish.
19 The caravans of Tema look;
the travelers of Sheba hope for them.
20 They are disappointed because they were confident;
they come there and are confounded.
21 For now you are nothing;
you see terror and are afraid.


22 Have I said, ‘Give to me’?
Or, ‘Offer a gift for me from your wealth’?
23 Or, ‘Deliver me from the hand of the adversary’?
Or, ‘Redeem me from the hand of the ruthless’?


24 Teach me, and I will be silent;
make me understand how I have gone astray.
25 How painful are honest words!
But what does your argument prove?
26 Do you intend to correct my words,
when the words of a despairing man are like the wind?
27 You would even cast lots for the orphan,
and bargain over your friend.


28 But now be pleased to look at me,
for I will not lie to your face.
29 Turn, I pray, let there be no injustice;
Return again to me, my cause is righteous.
30 Is there injustice on my tongue?
Can my palate not discern calamity?”


***
Chapter 7


1 “Does not man have hard service on earth,
and are not his days like those of a hired hand?
2 Like a slave who longs for the shadow,
and like a hired man who looks for his wages,
3 so I have been allotted months of futility,
and nights of misery have been appointed to me.
4 When I lie down I say, ‘When shall I arise?’
But the night is long,
and I am full of tossing till the dawn.
5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust;
my skin hardens, then breaks out afresh.
6 My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle,
and come to an end without hope.


7 Remember that my life is but a breath;
my eye will never again see good.
8 The eye of him who sees me will behold me no more;
Your eyes will be upon me, but I shall be gone.
9 As the cloud fades and vanishes,
so he who goes down to the grave does not come up.
10 He returns no more to his house,
nor does his place know him any longer.


11 Therefore I will not restrain my mouth;
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit;
I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
12 Am I the sea, or a sea monster,
that You set a guard over me?
13 When I say, ‘My bed will comfort me,
my couch will ease my complaint,’
14 then You frighten me with dreams
and terrify me with visions,
15 so that my soul chooses strangling,
death rather than my bones.
16 I loathe my life; I would not live forever.
Leave me alone, for my days are a breath.


17 What is man that You make much of him,
and that You set Your heart on him,
18 and visit him every morning,
and test him every moment?
19 How long will You not look away from me,
nor leave me alone till I swallow my spittle?
20 If I have sinned, what have I done to You,
O watcher of mankind?
Why have You made me Your target,
so that I am a burden to myself?
21 Why then do You not pardon my transgression
and take away my iniquity?
For now I shall lie down in the dust;
You will seek me, but I shall be no more.”




Chapter 8


1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:


2 “How long will you say these things,
and the words of your mouth be a great wind?
3 Does God pervert justice,
or does the Almighty pervert what is right?
4 If your sons sinned against Him,
He gave them over to the power of their transgression.
5 But if you will seek God
and plead with the Almighty for mercy,
6 if you are pure and upright,
surely now He will rouse Himself for you
and restore your rightful habitation.
7 Though your beginning was small,
your latter end will be very great.


8 For inquire, I pray you, of the former generation,
and pay attention to what their fathers searched out—
9 for we are but of yesterday and know nothing,
because our days on earth are a shadow—
10 will they not teach you and tell you,
and utter words from their heart?


11 Can papyrus grow where there is no marsh?
Can reeds flourish without water?
12 While it is still green and not cut down,
it withers before any other plant.
13 Such are the paths of all who forget God;
the hope of the godless shall perish,
14 whose confidence is cut off,
and whose trust is a spider’s web.
15 He leans against his house, but it does not stand;
he holds it fast, but it does not endure.
16 He is full of sap before the sun,
and his shoots spread over his garden.
17 His roots entwine the stone heap;
he looks for a place among the rocks.
18 If he is destroyed from his place,
then it will deny him, saying, ‘I have never seen you.’
19 See, this is the joy of his way,
and out of the dust others will spring.


20 You see that God will not reject the blameless man,
nor take the hand of evildoers.
21 He will yet fill your mouth with laughter,
and your lips with shouting.
22 Those who hate you will be clothed with shame,
and the tent of the wicked will be no more.”




Chapter 9


1 Then Job answered and said:


2 “Truly I know that this is so;
but how can a man be right before God?
3 If one should wish to contend with Him,
he could not answer Him once in a thousand times.
4 He is wise in heart and mighty in strength—
who has hardened himself against Him and prospered?—
5 He who removes mountains, and they do not know it,
when He overturns them in His anger;
6 who shakes the earth out of its place,
so that its pillars tremble;
7 who commands the sun, and it does not rise,
and seals up the stars;
8 who alone stretches out the heavens
and treads upon the waves of the sea;
9 who made the Bear and Orion,
the Pleiades and the chambers of the south;
10 who does great things beyond searching out,
and wonders beyond number.


11 If He passes by me, I do not see Him;
if He moves past, I do not perceive Him.
12 If He snatches away, who can turn Him back?
Who will say to Him, ‘What are You doing?’
13 God will not turn back His anger;
beneath Him the helpers of Rahab bow.


14 How then can I answer Him,
choosing my words with Him?
15 Though I am in the right, I could not answer;
I must plead for mercy to my Judge.
16 If I summoned Him and He answered me,
I would not believe that He was listening to my voice.
17 For He crushes me with a tempest
and multiplies my wounds without cause.
18 He will not allow me to catch my breath,
but fills me with bitterness.
19 If it is a matter of strength—He is mighty!
And if of justice, who can summon Him?
20 Though I am righteous, my own mouth will condemn me;
though I am blameless, He will prove me crooked.
21 I am blameless; I care not for myself;
I despise my life.


22 It is all one; therefore I say,
He destroys the blameless and the wicked.
23 When the scourge brings sudden death,
He mocks at the despair of the innocent.
24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked;
He covers the faces of its judges—
if it is not He, then who is it?


25 My days are swifter than a runner;
they flee away, they see no good.
26 They pass by like reed boats,
like an eagle swooping down on prey.
27 If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint,
I will put off my sad face and be cheerful,’
28 I become afraid of all my sorrows,
for I know that You will not hold me innocent.
29 I shall be condemned;
why then do I labor in vain?
30 If I wash myself with snow
and cleanse my hands with lye,
31 yet You will plunge me into a pit,
and my own clothes will abhor me.


32 For He is not a man, as I am, that I might answer Him,
that we should come together in judgment.
33 There is no arbiter between us,
who might lay his hand upon us both.
34 Let Him remove His rod from me,
and let not His terror frighten me.
35 Then I would speak and not fear Him,
for I am not so in myself.”




Chapter 10


1 “My soul loathes my life;
I will give free course to my complaint;
I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
2 I will say to God, ‘Do not condemn me;
show me why You contend with me.
3 Does it seem good to You to oppress,
to despise the work of Your hands,
and to shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
4 Do You have eyes of flesh?
Do You see as man sees?
5 Are Your days like the days of a mortal,
or Your years like the days of a man,
6 that You seek out my iniquity
and search for my sin,
7 although You know that I am not wicked,
and there is no one who can deliver from Your hand?


8 Your hands fashioned me and made me;
yet You destroy me altogether.
9 Remember that You have made me like clay;
and will You return me to dust again?
10 Did You not pour me out like milk
and curdle me like cheese?
11 You clothed me with skin and flesh,
and knit me together with bones and sinews.
12 You granted me life and lovingkindness,
and Your care has preserved my spirit.


13 Yet these things You have hidden in Your heart;
I know that this was in Your mind:
14 If I sin, You watch me
and will not acquit me of my guilt.
15 If I am wicked, woe to me!
If I am righteous, I cannot lift up my head,
for I am filled with disgrace
and look on my affliction.
16 And if my head is exalted, You hunt me like a lion,
and again You display Your power against me.
17 You renew Your witnesses against me
and increase Your anger toward me;
relief troops come against me in succession.


18 Why then did You bring me out from the womb?
I should have died and no eye would have seen me.
19 I should have been as though I had not been,
carried from the womb to the grave.
20 Are not my days few? Cease then,
and leave me alone, that I may have a little comfort
21 before I go, never to return,
to the land of darkness and deep shadow,
22 the land of gloom like darkness itself,
of deep shadow and confusion,
where light is as darkness.”


***
Chapter 11


1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said:
2 “Should not a multitude of words be answered,
and should a man full of talk be justified?
3 Should your babble make men silent,
and when you mock, shall no one shame you?
4 For you have said, ‘My teaching is pure,
and I am clean in your eyes.’
5 But oh that GOD would speak,
and open His lips against you,
6 and that He would declare to you the secrets of wisdom,
for sound wisdom has two sides.
Know then that GOD exacts of you less than your iniquity deserves.


7 Can you search out the deep things of GOD?
Can you find out the limit of the Almighty?
8 It is higher than heaven—what can you do?
Deeper than the grave—what can you know?
9 Its measure is longer than the earth,
and broader than the sea.
10 If He passes through and imprisons
and summons to judgment, who can hinder Him?
11 For He knows worthless men;
when He sees iniquity, will He not consider it?
12 But a hollow man will get understanding
when a wild donkey’s colt is born a man.


13 If you prepare your heart,
and stretch out your hands toward Him,
14 if iniquity is in your hand, put it far away,
and let no injustice dwell in your tents.
15 Then surely you will lift up your face without blemish;
you will be steadfast and will not fear.
16 For you will forget your misery;
you will remember it as waters that have passed away.
17 And your life will be brighter than noonday;
darkness will be like the morning.
18 And you will have confidence, because there is hope;
you will look around and lie down in safety.
19 You will lie down, and none will make you afraid,
and many will seek your favor.


20 But the eyes of the wicked will fail;
escape will vanish from them,
and their hope is to breathe their last.”




Chapter 12


1 Then Job answered and said:
2 “Truly, you are the people,
and wisdom will die with you.
3 But I have understanding as well as you;
I am not inferior to you.
And who does not know such things as these?


4 I am a laughingstock to my friends,
I who called on GOD and He answered me—
a just and blameless man, a laughingstock.
5 He who is at ease has contempt for calamity,
thinking it is ready for those whose foot slips.
6 The tents of robbers are at peace,
and those who provoke GOD are secure,
those who bring their god in their hand.


7 But ask the beasts, and they will teach you;
the birds of the heavens, and they will tell you.
8 Or speak to the earth, and it will teach you;
and the fish of the sea will declare to you.
9 Who among all these does not know
that the hand of the LORD has done this?
10 In His hand is the life of every living thing
and the breath of all mankind.


11 Does not the ear test words
as the palate tastes food?
12 Wisdom is with the aged,
and understanding in length of days.


13 With GOD are wisdom and might;
He has counsel and understanding.
14 If He tears down, none can rebuild;
if He shuts a man in, none can open.
15 If He withholds the waters, they dry up;
if He sends them out, they overwhelm the earth.
16 With Him are strength and sound wisdom;
the deceived and the deceiver are His.


17 He leads counselors away stripped,
and makes judges fools.
18 He loosens the bond of kings,
and binds a waistcloth on their loins.
19 He leads priests away stripped,
and overthrows the mighty.
20 He removes speech from trusted men,
and takes away understanding from elders.
21 He pours contempt on nobles,
and loosens the belt of the strong.
22 He reveals deep things out of darkness,
and brings to light the shadow of death.
23 He makes nations great, and destroys them;
He enlarges nations, and leads them away.
24 He takes away the heart of the chiefs of the people of the earth,
and makes them wander in a pathless waste.
25 They grope in the dark without light,
and He makes them stagger like a drunken man.




Chapter 13


1 My eye has seen all this,
my ear has heard and understood it.
2 What you know, I also know;
I am not inferior to you.


3 But I would speak to the Almighty,
and I desire to argue my case with GOD.
4 But you, you smear lies;
you are all worthless physicians.
5 Oh that you would altogether be silent,
and it would be your wisdom!


6 Hear now my argument,
and listen to the pleadings of my lips.
7 Will you speak unrighteously for GOD,
and speak deceitfully for Him?
8 Will you show partiality for Him?
Will you contend for GOD?
9 Will it be well when He searches you out?
Or can you deceive Him as one deceives a man?
10 He will surely reprove you
if in secret you show partiality.
11 Will not His majesty terrify you,
and the dread of Him fall upon you?
12 Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes;
your defenses are defenses of clay.


13 Be silent before me so that I may speak,
and let come on me what may.
14 Why should I take my flesh in my teeth,
and put my life in my hand?
15 Though He slay me, I will wait for Him;
yet I will argue my ways before His face.
16 This also will be my salvation,
for a godless man shall not come before Him.


17 Listen diligently to my words,
and let my declaration enter your ears.
18 Behold now, I have set my case in order;
I know that I will be vindicated.
19 Who is he that will contend with me?
For then I would be silent and die.


20 Only two things do not do to me,
then I will not hide myself from Your face:
21 withdraw Your hand far from me,
and let not Your terror make me afraid.
22 Then call, and I will answer;
or let me speak, and You reply to me.


23 How many are my iniquities and sins?
Make me know my transgression and my sin.
24 Why do You hide Your face,
and count me as Your enemy?
25 Will You frighten a driven leaf,
and pursue dry stubble?
26 For You write bitter things against me,
and make me inherit the iniquities of my youth.
27 You put my feet in the stocks,
and watch all my paths;
You mark the soles of my feet,
28 though I waste away like a rotten thing,
like a garment that is moth-eaten.




Chapter 14


1 Man born of woman
is short of days and full of trouble.
2 He comes forth like a flower and withers;
he flees like a shadow and does not endure.
3 Yet You open Your eyes upon such a one
and bring me into judgment with You.
4 Who can bring a clean thing out of the unclean?
No one.
5 Since his days are determined,
the number of his months is with You,
and You have set his limits that he cannot pass,
6 look away from him and let him rest,
until, like a hired man, he finishes his day.


7 For there is hope for a tree,
if it is cut down, it will sprout again,
and its shoots will not cease.
8 Though its root grows old in the earth,
and its stump dies in the ground,
9 yet at the scent of water it will bud
and put forth branches like a young plant.
10 But a man dies and is laid low;
man breathes his last, and where is he?
11 As the waters fail from a lake,
and a river wastes away and dries up,
12 so a man lies down and does not rise.
Till the heavens are no more, he will not awake,
nor be roused out of his sleep.


13 Oh that You would hide me in the grave,
that You would conceal me until Your wrath is past,
that You would appoint me a set time and remember me!
14 If a man dies, shall he live again?
All the days of my hard service I would wait,
till my renewal should come.
15 You would call, and I would answer You;
You would long for the work of Your hands.
16 For then You would number my steps;
You would not keep watch over my sin.
17 My transgression would be sealed up in a bag,
and You would cover over my iniquity.


18 But the mountain falls and crumbles away,
and the rock is removed from its place;
19 the waters wear away the stones,
the torrents wash away the dust of the earth—
so You destroy the hope of man.
20 You overpower him forever, and he passes;
You change his face and send him away.
21 His sons come to honor, and he does not know it;
they are brought low, and he does not perceive it.
22 He feels only the pain of his own body,
and mourns only for himself.”




Chapter 15


1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said:
2 “Should a wise man answer with windy knowledge,
and fill his belly with the east wind?
3 Should he reason with unprofitable talk,
or with words that do no good?
4 Indeed, you do away with the fear of GOD,
and hinder meditation before GOD.
5 For your iniquity teaches your mouth,
and you choose the tongue of the crafty.
6 Your own mouth condemns you, and not I;
your lips testify against you.


7 Were you the first man born?
Or were you brought forth before the hills?
8 Have you listened in the council of GOD?
And do you limit wisdom to yourself?
9 What do you know that we do not know?
What do you understand that is not with us?
10 Both the gray-haired and the aged are among us,
older than your father.
11 Are the consolations of GOD too small for you,
or the word spoken gently to you?
12 Why does your heart carry you away,
and why do your eyes flash,
13 that you turn your spirit against GOD,
and let such words go out of your mouth?


14 What is man, that he should be pure,
or he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
15 Behold, He puts no trust even in His holy ones,
and the heavens are not pure in His sight;
16 how much less one who is abominable and corrupt,
a man who drinks injustice like water!


17 I will show you, listen to me;
what I have seen I will declare,
18 what wise men have told,
and have not hidden from their fathers,
19 to whom alone the land was given,
and no stranger passed among them.


20 The wicked man writhes in pain all his days,
through all the years stored up for the ruthless.
21 A sound of terror is in his ears;
in prosperity the destroyer comes upon him.
22 He does not believe that he will return from darkness,
and he is marked for the sword.
23 He wanders for bread, saying, ‘Where is it?’
He knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
24 Distress and anguish terrify him;
they prevail against him like a king ready for battle.
25 For he has stretched out his hand against GOD,
and behaved proudly against the Almighty,
26 running stubbornly against Him
with his thickly bossed shields.


27 Though he has covered his face with fatness,
and gathered fat upon his loins,
28 he dwells in desolate cities,
in houses no one should inhabit,
which are ready to become heaps.
29 He will not be rich, and his wealth will not endure,
nor will his possessions spread over the earth.
30 He will not depart from darkness;
the flame will dry up his shoots,
and by the breath of His mouth he will go away.


31 Let him not trust in emptiness, deceiving himself,
for emptiness will be his reward.
32 It will be fulfilled before his time,
and his branch will not be green.
33 He will shake off his unripe grape like the vine,
and cast off his blossom like the olive tree.
34 For the company of the godless will be barren,
and fire will consume the tents of bribery.
35 They conceive trouble and give birth to evil,
and their womb prepares deceit.”




Chapter 16


1 Then Job answered and said:
2 “I have heard many such things;
miserable comforters are you all.
3 Shall windy words have an end?
Or what provokes you that you answer?
4 I also could speak as you do,
if your soul were in my soul’s place;
I could join words together against you,
and shake my head at you.
5 But I would strengthen you with my mouth,
and the solace of my lips would lessen your pain.


6 Though I speak, my pain is not relieved;
and though I cease, how am I eased?
7 But now He has exhausted me;
You have laid waste all my company.
8 You have shriveled me up—it has become a witness;
my leanness rises up against me, it testifies to my face.
9 His wrath tears and pursues me;
He gnashes His teeth against me;
my adversary sharpens His eyes upon me.
10 They gape at me with their mouths;
they strike me on the cheek with reproach;
they mass themselves together against me.
11 GOD delivers me to the ungodly,
and casts me into the hands of the wicked.


12 I was at ease, and He shattered me;
He seized me by the neck and broke me in pieces.
He has set me up as His target;
13 His archers surround me.
He pierces my kidneys without pity;
He pours out my gall on the ground.
14 He breaks me with breach upon breach;
He runs at me like a warrior.


15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin,
and thrust my horn into the dust.
16 My face is red with weeping,
and on my eyelids is deep darkness,
17 though there is no violence in my hands,
and my prayer is pure.


18 O earth, do not cover my blood,
and let there be no resting place for my cry.
19 Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven,
and He who testifies for me is on high.
20 My friends scorn me;
my eyes pour out tears to GOD,
21 that one might plead for a man with GOD,
as a man pleads for his neighbor.
22 For when a few years have come,
I shall go the way from which I shall not return.”




Chapter 17


1 My spirit is broken,
my days are extinguished,
the grave is ready for me.
2 Surely mockers are with me,
and my eye dwells on their provocation.


3 Lay down a pledge for me with Yourself;
who is there who will strike hands with me?
4 For You have closed their heart to understanding;
therefore You will not let them triumph.
5 He who denounces friends for a share of the spoil,
the eyes of his children will fail.


6 He has made me a byword of the people,
and I am one in whose face they spit.
7 My eye has grown dim from grief,
and all my limbs are but a shadow.
8 Upright men are appalled at this,
and the innocent stirs himself against the godless.
9 Yet the righteous holds to his way,
and he who has clean hands grows stronger and stronger.


10 But as for all of you, come again, I pray,
for I shall not find a wise man among you.
11 My days are past, my plans are broken off,
the desires of my heart.
12 They make night into day;
they say, ‘The light is near,’ in the presence of darkness.
13 If I wait for Sheol as my house,
if I spread my bed in darkness,
14 if I call to the pit, ‘You are my father,’
and to the worm, ‘My mother’ or ‘My sister,’
15 where then is my hope?
And who sees any hope for me?
16 Will it go down to the bars of Sheol?
Shall we descend together into the dust?”




Chapter 18


1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:
2 “How long will you hunt for words?
Consider, and afterward we will speak.
3 Why are we counted as beasts,
and regarded as stupid in your sight?
4 You who tear yourself in anger—
shall the earth be forsaken for your sake,
or the rock be removed from its place?


5 Yes, the light of the wicked is put out,
and the flame of his fire does not shine.
6 The light in his tent is darkened,
and his lamp above him is put out.
7 His vigorous steps are shortened,
and his own counsel casts him down.
8 For he is cast into a net by his own feet,
and he walks upon a mesh.
9 A snare seizes him by the heel;
a trap takes hold of him.
10 A rope is hidden for him in the ground,
and a trap for him on the path.


11 Terrors frighten him on every side
and chase him at his heels.
12 His strength is famished,
and calamity is ready for his stumbling.
13 It devours the parts of his skin;
the firstborn of death consumes his limbs.
14 He is torn from the security of his tent,
and it marches him to the king of terrors.
15 What was his tent becomes the home of one not his own;
brimstone is scattered on his dwelling.
16 His roots dry up beneath,
and his branches wither above.
17 His memory perishes from the earth,
and he has no name in the street.
18 He is driven from light into darkness,
and chased out of the world.
19 He has neither son nor descendant among his people,
nor any survivor where he sojourned.
20 Those in the west are appalled at his fate,
and those in the east are seized with horror.
21 Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked,
and this is the place of him who does not know GOD.”




Chapter 19


1 Then Job answered and said:
2 How long will you torment my soul
and crush me with words?
3 These ten times you have reproached me;
you are not ashamed that you wrong me.
4 And if indeed I have erred,
my error remains lodged with me.
5 If truly you magnify yourselves against me
and argue against me my disgrace,
6 know now that God has wronged me
and has enclosed His net around me.


7 I cry out, “Violence!” but I am not answered;
I cry for help, but there is no justice.
8 He has hemmed up my way so that I cannot pass,
and He has set darkness upon my paths.
9 He has stripped my glory from me
and taken the crown from my head.
10 He breaks me down on every side, and I am gone,
and He has uprooted my hope like a tree.
11 His wrath burns against me,
and He counts me as one of His adversaries.
12 His troops come together and cast up their rampart against me
and encamp around my tent.


13 He has removed my brothers far from me,
and my acquaintances have turned aside from me.
14 My near friends have failed me,
and those who knew me have forgotten me.
15 The sojourners in my house and my maidservants count me as a stranger;
I have become a foreigner in their sight.
16 I call to my servant, and he does not answer;
with my own mouth I must beg him.
17 My breath is offensive to my wife,
and I am loathsome to the sons of my own body.
18 Even young boys despise me;
when I rise, they speak against me.
19 All my intimate friends abhor me,
and those whom I loved have turned against me.


20 My bones cling to my skin and to my flesh,
and I have escaped with the skin of my teeth.
21 Have mercy on me, have mercy on me, O my friends,
for the hand of God has struck me.
22 Why do you persecute me as God does,
and are not satisfied with my flesh?


23 Oh that my words were written!
Oh that they were inscribed in a book!
24 That with an iron stylus and with lead
they were engraved in the rock forever!


25 But as for me, I know that my Redeemer lives,
and at the last He will stand upon the dust.
26 And after my skin has been struck off,
yet from my flesh I shall see God,
27 whom I shall see for myself,
and my eyes will behold, and not another.
My heart faints within me.


28 If you say, “How shall we persecute him?”
and, “The root of the matter is found in him,”
29 be afraid of the sword,
for wrath brings the punishments of the sword,
so that you may know there is judgment.




Chapter 20


1 Then Zophar the Naamathite answered and said:
2 Therefore my thoughts make me return,
and by reason of my haste within me.
3 I hear the reproof that insults me,
and the spirit of my understanding gives me an answer.


4 Do you not know this from of old,
from the placing of man upon the earth,
5 that the triumph of the wicked is short,
and the joy of the godless for a moment?
6 Though his height mounts up to the heavens,
and his head reaches to the clouds,
7 he perishes forever like his own refuse;
those who saw him will say, “Where is he?”
8 He will fly away like a dream, and they will not find him;
he will be chased away like a vision of the night.
9 The eye that saw him will see him no more,
and his place will behold him no longer.


10 His sons will seek the favor of the poor,
and his own hands will restore his wealth.
11 His bones are full of the vigor of his youth,
but it lies down with him in the dust.


12 Though evil tastes sweet in his mouth,
though he hides it under his tongue,
13 though he spares it and does not let it go,
but keeps it within his mouth,
14 yet his food in his stomach is turned;
it becomes the poison of serpents within him.
15 He has swallowed riches, but he will vomit them up;
God will drive them out of his belly.
16 He will suck the poison of serpents;
the tongue of a viper will slay him.
17 He will not look upon the streams,
the flowing rivers of honey and curds.


18 He returns the gain but will not swallow it;
according to the wealth he has gotten, he cannot rejoice.
19 For he has crushed and abandoned the poor;
he has seized a house he did not build.
20 Because he knew no quiet in his belly,
he will not save anything in which he delights.
21 Nothing is left of what he devoured;
therefore his prosperity will not endure.
22 In the fullness of his sufficiency he will be in distress;
the hand of every troublemaker will come upon him.


23 When he is about to fill his belly,
God will send upon him the heat of His wrath
and will rain it upon him while he eats.
24 He flees from an iron weapon;
a bronze bow pierces him through.
25 He draws it forth, and it comes out of his body;
the glittering point comes out from his gall.
Terrors come upon him.


26 Complete darkness is stored up for his treasures;
a fire not blown by man will consume him;
it will devour what is left in his tent.
27 The heavens will reveal his iniquity,
and the earth will rise up against him.
28 The increase of his house will depart;
it will be swept away in the day of His wrath.


29 This is the portion of a wicked man from God,
and the inheritance appointed to him by God.




Chapter 21


1 Then Job answered and said:
2 Listen carefully to my speech,
and let this be your consolation.
3 Bear with me, and I will speak;
and after I have spoken, you may mock.


4 As for me, is my complaint to man?
And why should my spirit not be impatient?
5 Look at me and be appalled,
and lay your hand upon your mouth.
6 When I remember, I am dismayed,
and trembling seizes my flesh.


7 Why do the wicked live,
grow old,
and become mighty in power?
8 Their offspring are established with them before their face,
and their descendants before their eyes.
9 Their houses are safe from fear,
and the rod of God is not upon them.
10 His bull breeds without fail;
his cow calves and does not miscarry.
11 They send out their little ones like a flock,
and their children dance.
12 They lift up the tambourine and harp,
and rejoice at the sound of the flute.
13 They spend their days in prosperity,
and in a moment go down to Sheol.
14 Yet they say to God, “Depart from us,
for we do not desire the knowledge of Your ways.
15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him?
And what profit do we have if we entreat Him?”


16 See, their prosperity is not in their own hand;
the counsel of the wicked is far from me.


17 How often is the lamp of the wicked put out?
How often does their calamity come upon them?
Does He distribute sorrows in His anger?
18 Are they as straw before the wind,
and as chaff that the storm carries away?
19 You say, “God stores up his iniquity for his sons.”
Let Him repay him, that he may know it.
20 Let his own eyes see his destruction,
and let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
21 For what does he care for his house after him,
when the number of his months is cut off?


22 Will any teach knowledge to God,
since He judges those who are on high?
23 One dies in full strength,
being wholly at ease and secure;
24 his sides full of milk,
and the marrow of his bones moist.
25 Another dies in bitterness of soul,
and never eats with pleasure.
26 Together they lie down in the dust,
and worms cover them.


27 Look, I know your thoughts,
and the devices with which you wrong me.
28 For you say, “Where is the house of the prince?
And where is the tent in which the wicked lived?”
29 Have you not asked those who travel the roads?
And do you not recognize their witnesses,
30 that the wicked is spared in the day of calamity,
that he is delivered in the day of wrath?
31 Who declares his way to his face?
And who repays him for what he has done?
32 He is carried to the grave,
and men keep watch over his tomb.
33 The clods of the valley are sweet to him;
all men follow after him,
and those who went before are without number.


34 How then do you comfort me with emptiness,
when your answers remain falsehood?




Chapter 22


1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said,
2 Can a man be of use to God,
 for the wise man is useful only to himself?
3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty if you are righteous,
 or gain if you make your way blameless?
4 Is it because of your fear of Him that He reproves you,
 that He enters into judgment with you?
5 Is not your wickedness great,
 and are not your iniquities without end?
6 For you have taken pledges from your brothers without cause,
 and stripped the naked of their clothing.
7 You have not given water to the weary to drink,
 and you have withheld bread from the hungry.
8 But the man of power—his is the land,
 and the honored man dwells in it.
9 You have sent widows away empty,
 and the arms of the fatherless have been crushed.
10 Therefore snares are all around you,
 and sudden dread terrifies you,
11 or darkness, so that you cannot see,
 and a flood of waters covers you.


12 Is not God in the height of the heavens?
 And you see that the lofty stars—how high they are.
13 And you say, “What does God know?
 Can He judge through deep darkness?
14 Clouds are a covering to Him so that He cannot see,
 and He walks on the vault of heaven.”
15 Will you keep to the ancient path
 that wicked men have trod,
16 who were snatched away before their time,
 whose foundation was washed away by a torrent,
17 who said to God, “Depart from us,”
 and, “What can the Almighty do to us?”
18 Yet He filled their houses with good things,
 but the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
19 The righteous see it and are glad,
 and the innocent mock them,
20 saying, “Surely our adversaries are cut off,
 and fire has consumed their abundance.”


21 Acquaint yourself now with Him, and be at peace;
 thereby good will come to you.
22 Receive instruction, I pray you, from His mouth,
 and lay up His words in your heart.
23 If you return to the Almighty you will be restored;
 if you remove unrighteousness far from your tents,
24 and place your gold in the dust,
 and the gold of Ophir among the stones of the ravines,
25 then the Almighty will be your gold
 and your precious silver.
26 For then you will delight yourself in the Almighty
 and lift up your face to God.
27 You will pray to Him, and He will hear you;
 and you will fulfill your vows.
28 You will decree a matter, and it will stand for you;
 and light will shine on your ways.
29 When men are cast down, you will say, “Lift them up,”
 and He will save the humble.
30 He will deliver even the one who is not innocent;
 he will be delivered through the cleanness of your hands.




Chapter 23


1 Then Job answered and said,
2 Even today my complaint is bitter;
 my hand is heavy on account of my groaning.
3 Oh that I knew where I might find Him,
 that I might come to His seat!
4 I would set my case in order before Him
 and fill my mouth with arguments.
5 I would know the words He would answer me
 and understand what He would say to me.
6 Would He contend with me by the greatness of His power?
 No, surely He would give heed to me.
7 There an upright man could reason with Him,
 and I would be delivered forever from my Judge.


8 I go forward, but He is not there,
 and backward, but I do not perceive Him;
9 on the left when He is working, but I cannot behold Him;
 He turns to the right, but I do not see Him.
10 But He knows the way that I take;
 when He has tested me, I will come out as gold.
11 My foot has held fast to His steps;
 I have kept His way and have not turned aside.
12 I have not departed from the command of His lips;
 I have treasured the words of His mouth more than my portion.


13 But He is of one mind, and who can turn Him?
 What His soul desires, that He does.
14 For He will complete what is appointed for me,
 and many such things are with Him.
15 Therefore I am terrified before Him;
 when I consider, I fear Him.
16 For God has made my heart faint,
 and the Almighty has terrified me,
17 yet I am not silenced because of the darkness,
 nor because thick darkness covers my face.




Chapter 24


1 Why are times not stored up by the Almighty,
and why do those who know Him not see His days?
2 They move boundary stones;
they seize flocks and pasture them.
3 They drive away the donkey of the fatherless;
they take the widow’s ox as a pledge.
4 They thrust the needy off the road;
the poor of the land must hide together.
5 Look, like wild donkeys in the wilderness,
they go out in their labor, seeking prey;
the desert yields food for them and for their children.
6 They reap in a field that is not theirs,
and they glean the vineyard of the wicked.
7 They spend the night naked, without clothing,
and have no covering in the cold.
8 They are wet with the showers of the mountains,
and embrace the rock for lack of shelter.
9 They snatch the fatherless from the breast,
and take a pledge against the poor.
10 They go about naked, without clothing,
and hungry, they carry the sheaves.
11 They press out oil within their terraces;
they tread the winepresses, yet suffer thirst.
12 From the city men groan,
and the soul of the wounded cries out,
yet GOD charges no one with wrongdoing.


13 These are among those who rebel against the light;
they do not acknowledge its ways,
and they do not remain in its paths.
14 The murderer rises at dawn;
he kills the poor and needy,
and in the night he is like a thief.
15 The eye of the adulterer waits for twilight,
saying, ‘No eye will see me,’
and he puts a cover on his face.
16 They dig through houses in the dark;
by day they shut themselves in;
they do not know the light.
17 For morning is to all of them as deep darkness,
for they are familiar with the terrors of deep darkness.


18 He is swift on the face of the waters;
their portion in the land is cursed;
he does not turn toward the way of the vineyards.
19 Drought and heat snatch away the snow waters;
so Sheol snatches those who sin.
20 The womb forgets him;
the worm feeds sweetly on him;
he is no longer remembered,
and wickedness is broken like a tree.
21 He preys on the barren who does not bear,
and does no good to the widow.
22 Yet He draws the mighty away by His power;
He rises up, and no man is sure of life.
23 He gives him security, and he is supported;
yet His eyes are on their ways.
24 They are exalted a little while, then they are gone;
they are brought low and gathered in like all others;
they are cut off like the tops of ears of grain.
25 And if this is not so, who can prove me a liar,
and make my speech worthless?”




Chapter 25


1 Then Bildad the Shuhite answered and said:
2 “Dominion and fear are with Him;
He makes peace in His high places.
3 Is there any number to His armies?
And upon whom does His light not rise?
4 How then can man be righteous with GOD?
Or how can one born of woman be pure?
5 Look, even the moon does not shine brightly,
and the stars are not pure in His eyes;
6 how much less man, a maggot,
and the son of man, a worm.”




Chapter 26


1 Then Job answered and said:


2 “How you have helped one without strength,
saved the arm that has no power!
3 How you have counseled one without wisdom,
and made abundant sound knowledge known!
4 With whose help have you uttered words,
and whose breath came forth from you?


5 The shades tremble beneath the waters
and those who dwell in them.
6 Sheol is naked before Him,
and Abaddon has no covering.
7 He stretches out the north over emptiness,
He hangs the earth on nothing.
8 He binds up the waters in His thick clouds,
and the cloud is not torn under them.
9 He covers the face of His throne,
and spreads His cloud over it.
10 He has inscribed a boundary on the face of the waters,
at the limit of light and darkness.
11 The pillars of heaven tremble,
and are astounded at His rebuke.
12 By His power He stirs the sea,
and by His understanding He shatters Rahab.
13 By His breath the heavens are cleared;
His hand pierced the fleeing serpent.
14 Look, these are only the fringes of His ways,
and how faint is the whisper we hear of Him!
But the thunder of His power who can understand?”




Chapter 27


1 Job continued his discourse and said:
2 “As God lives, who has taken away my right,
and the Almighty, who has embittered my soul,
3 so long as my breath is in me
and the spirit of God is in my nostrils,
4 my lips will not speak falsehood,
and my tongue will not utter deceit.
5 Far be it from me to say you are right;
until I die, I will not put away my integrity from me.
6 I hold fast to my righteousness and will not let it go;
my heart does not reproach me for any of my days.
7 Let my enemy be as the wicked,
and he who rises against me as the unrighteous.
8 For what is the hope of the godless when God cuts him off,
when the LORD requires his life?
9 Will God hear his cry
when distress comes upon him?
10 Will he take delight in the Almighty?
Will he call upon God at all times?
11 I will teach you about the hand of God;
I will not conceal what is with the Almighty.
12 Look, all of you have seen it yourselves;
so why is this that you are altogether vain?


13 This is the portion of a wicked man with God,
and the inheritance that tyrants receive from the Almighty:
14 If his sons multiply, the sword awaits them,
and his offspring will not have enough to eat.
15 Those who survive him will be buried by the plague,
and his widows will not weep.
16 Though he pile up silver like dust
and prepare garments like clay,
17 he may prepare it, but the righteous will wear it,
and the innocent will divide the silver.
18 He builds his house like a moth,
like a hut made by a watchman.
19 He lies down rich, but it will not last;
he opens his eyes, and it is gone.
20 Terrors overtake him like a flood;
a storm wind steals him away in the night.
21 The east wind lifts him up, and he is gone;
it sweeps him out of his place.
22 It hurls itself at him without pity;
he flees desperately from its power.
23 It claps its hands at him
and hisses him out of his place.”




Chapter 28


1 “Surely there is a mine for silver,
and a place where gold is refined.
2 Iron is taken out of the dust,
and copper is smelted from stone.
3 Man puts an end to darkness
and searches out to the farthest limits
the stones hidden in gloom and deep shadow.
4 He breaks open a shaft away from where men dwell;
they are forgotten by the traveler.
They hang and swing far from mankind.
5 As for the earth, from it comes bread,
yet beneath it is turned up as if by fire.
6 Its stones are the place of sapphires,
and it contains dust of gold.
7 A path no bird of prey knows,
and the falcon’s eye has not seen it.
8 The proud beasts have not trodden it;
the lion has not passed over it.
9 Man stretches out his hand against the flinty rock;
he overturns mountains at their roots.
10 He cuts channels through the rocks,
and his eye sees every precious thing.
11 He dams up streams so they do not drip,
and what is hidden he brings to light.


12 But wisdom—where can it be found,
and where is the place of understanding?
13 Man does not know its value,
nor is it found in the land of the living.
14 The deep says, “It is not in me,”
and the sea says, “It is not with me.”
15 It cannot be bought with gold,
nor can silver be weighed out for its price.
16 It cannot be valued in the gold of Ophir,
in precious onyx or sapphire.
17 Gold or crystal cannot compare with it,
nor can it be exchanged for a vessel of fine gold.
18 Coral and crystal are not worth mentioning;
the price of wisdom is above pearls.
19 The topaz of Cush cannot compare with it;
it cannot be valued in pure gold.


20 So from where does wisdom come,
and where is the place of understanding?
21 It is hidden from the eyes of all living,
and concealed from the birds of the heavens.
22 Abaddon and Death say,
“We have heard a report of it with our ears.”
23 God understands its way,
and He knows its place.
24 For He looks to the ends of the earth
and sees everything under the heavens.
25 When He gave the wind its weight
and apportioned the waters by measure,
26 when He made a decree for the rain
and a path for the lightning of thunder,
27 then He saw it and declared it;
He established it and searched it out.
28 And He said to man,
“Look, the fear of the LORD—that is wisdom,
and to turn from evil is understanding.”




Chapter 29


1 Job again took up his discourse and said:
2 “Oh, that I were as in months past,
as in the days when God guarded me,
3 when His lamp shone over my head,
and by His light I walked through darkness;
4 as I was in the days of my prime,
when God’s friendship rested on my tent,
5 when the Almighty was still with me,
and my children were around me,
6 when my steps were washed with cream,
and the rock poured out streams of oil for me.


7 When I went out to the gate of the city,
when I took my seat in the square,
8 young men saw me and withdrew,
and the aged rose and stood;
9 princes restrained their words
and laid a hand over their mouths;
10 the voice of nobles was hushed,
and their tongue clung to the roof of their mouth.
11 For the ear that heard me blessed me,
and the eye that saw me approved,
12 because I delivered the poor who cried for help,
and the fatherless who had none to assist him.
13 The blessing of the one who was perishing came upon me,
and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy.
14 I clothed myself with righteousness, and it clothed me;
my justice was like a robe and a turban.
15 I was eyes to the blind
and feet to the lame.
16 I was a father to the needy,
and I examined the case of the stranger.
17 I broke the fangs of the wicked
and snatched the prey from his teeth.


18 Then I said, ‘I will die in my nest,
and I will multiply my days like the sand.
19 My root is spread out to the waters,
and the dew lies all night on my branch.
20 My glory is fresh in me,
and my bow is renewed in my hand.’


21 They listened to me and waited,
and kept silence for my counsel.
22 After I spoke, they did not speak again,
and my speech dropped on them like dew.
23 They waited for me as for the rain,
and opened their mouth wide as for the spring rain.
24 I smiled on them when they had no confidence,
and they did not cast down the light of my face.
25 I chose their way and sat as their chief;
I dwelled as a king among the troops,
as one who comforts mourners.”




Chapter 30


1 “But now those younger than I mock me,
whose fathers I would have refused
to set with the dogs of my flock.
2 Indeed, the strength of their hands—what use was it to me?
Their vigor had perished.
3 Through want and hunger they were gaunt,
they gnawed the dry ground in a parched wasteland,
4 they plucked salt herbs by the bushes,
and the roots of broom trees were their food.
5 They were driven out from the midst of men;
they shouted after them as after a thief,
6 so that they dwelled in the clefts of ravines,
in holes of the earth and in the rocks.
7 Among the bushes they brayed;
under the nettles they huddled together.
8 A senseless, nameless brood,
they were scourged out of the land.


9 And now I have become their mocking song;
I am a byword to them.
10 They detest me; they keep far from me,
and do not refrain from spitting in my face.
11 Because He has loosed my cord and afflicted me,
they cast off restraint in my presence.
12 On my right hand the rabble rise;
they push aside my feet
and cast up against me their destructive ways.
13 They tear up my path;
they profit from my ruin—
no one restrains them.
14 They come as through a wide breach;
amid the crash they roll on.


15 Terrors are turned upon me;
my dignity is chased away like the wind,
and my well-being has passed like a cloud.
16 And now my life pours out within me;
days of affliction seize me.
17 The night pierces my bones within me,
and my gnawing pains never rest.
18 By great force my garment is disfigured;
it binds me about like the collar of my tunic.
19 He has cast me into the dirt,
and I am compared to dust and ashes.


20 I cry to You, but You do not answer me;
I stand, and You only look at me.
21 You have turned cruel to me;
with the might of Your hand You persecute me.
22 You lift me up to the wind and make me ride it,
and You dissolve me in the storm.
23 For I know that You will bring me to death,
and to the house appointed for all the living.


24 Surely no man will stretch out his hand to strike a heap
when in his calamity he cries for help.
25 Did I not weep for him whose day was hard?
Was not my soul grieved for the needy?
26 Yet when I looked for good, evil came;
and when I waited for light, darkness came.
27 My inward parts are in turmoil and never rest;
days of affliction confront me.
28 I go about darkened, but not by the sun;
I rise in the assembly and cry for help.
29 I have become a brother of jackals
and a companion of ostriches.
30 My skin turns black and peels from me;
my bones burn with fever.
31 My harp has turned to mourning,
and my flute to the voice of those who weep.”




Chapter 31


1 “I made a covenant with my eyes;
how then could I gaze upon a virgin?
2 For what would be my portion from GOD above,
and my inheritance from the Almighty on high?
3 Is not calamity for the wicked,
and disaster for the workers of iniquity?
4 Does He not see my ways
and count all my steps?


5 If I have walked with falsehood,
and my foot has hurried to deceit,
6 let Him weigh me in a just balance,
and GOD will know my integrity.
7 If my steps have turned from the way,
or my heart has gone after my eyes,
or a stain has clung to my hands,
8 then let me sow and another eat,
and let what grows for me be uprooted.


9 If my heart has been enticed by a woman,
or I have lain in wait at my neighbor’s door,
10 then let my wife grind for another,
and let others lie with her.
11 For that would be a shameful act,
a crime for judges to punish;
12 for it is a fire that burns to Abaddon,
and it would consume all my harvest.


13 If I have rejected the cause of my servant or my maid
when they brought a complaint against me,
14 what then shall I do when GOD rises up?
And when He calls me to account, what shall I answer Him?
15 Did not He who made me in the womb make him?
And did not the same One form us in the belly?


16 If I have withheld the desires of the poor,
or caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
17 or eaten my morsel alone
so that the fatherless did not eat from it—
18 no, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father,
and from my mother’s womb I guided the widow—
19 if I have seen anyone perish for lack of clothing
or the poor without covering,
20 if his loins have not blessed me
and he was not warmed with the fleece of my sheep,
21 if I have lifted my hand against the fatherless
because I saw my help in the gate,
22 then let my shoulder fall from its joint,
and my arm be broken from the bone.
23 For destruction from GOD was a terror to me,
and because of His majesty I could not do such things.


24 If I have made gold my trust
or called fine gold my confidence,
25 if I have rejoiced because my wealth was great
and my hand had gained much,
26 if I have looked at the sun when it shone
or the moon moving in splendor,
27 and my heart was secretly enticed
and my hand kissed my mouth,
28 this also would be a crime for judges to punish,
for I would have denied GOD above.


29 If I have rejoiced at the ruin of him who hated me,
or exulted when evil found him—
30 I did not let my mouth sin
by asking for his life with a curse—
31 if the men of my tent have not said,
‘Who is there that has not been filled with his meat?’
32 the sojourner did not lodge in the street,
I opened my doors to the traveler.


33 If I have covered my transgressions like Adam,
hiding my iniquity in my bosom,
34 because I feared a great multitude
and the contempt of families terrified me,
so that I kept silent and did not go outdoors—


35 Oh that I had someone to hear me!
Look, here is my signature—let the Almighty answer me!
And let my accuser write his indictment.
36 Surely I would carry it on my shoulder;
I would bind it to me as a crown.
37 I would give Him an account of all my steps;
like a prince I would approach Him.


38 If my land cries out against me,
or its furrows weep together,
39 if I have eaten its yield without paying
or caused the lives of its owners to breathe out their last,
40 let thorns grow instead of wheat,
and weeds instead of barley.”




Chapter 32


1 So these three men ceased answering Job,
because he was righteous in his own eyes.
2 Then the anger of Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite,
of the family of Ram, burned against Job;
his anger burned because he justified himself rather than GOD.
3 And his anger burned against his three friends as well,
because they had found no answer
and yet had condemned Job.
4 Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job
because they were older than he.
5 But when Elihu saw that there was no answer
in the mouth of the three men,
his anger burned.


6 Then Elihu son of Barakel the Buzite answered and said:
“I am young in years,
and you are old;
therefore I was timid and afraid
to declare my opinion to you.
7 I said, ‘Let days speak,
and many years teach wisdom.’
8 But it is the spirit in man,
the breath of the Almighty, that gives understanding.
9 It is not the great in years who are wise,
nor the aged who understand justice.
10 Therefore I say, ‘Listen to me;
I also will declare my knowledge.’
11 Look, I waited for your words,
I listened for your reasoning,
while you searched out what to say.
12 And I paid close attention to you;
but there was none who proved Job wrong,
none who answered his words.
13 Do not say, ‘We have found wisdom;
GOD will defeat him, not man.’
14 But he has not directed his argument against me,
nor will I answer him with your speeches.


15 They are dismayed; they answer no more;
words have deserted them.
16 And shall I wait because they do not speak,
because they stand still and answer no longer?
17 I also will answer my share;
I also will declare my knowledge.
18 For I am full of words;
the spirit within me presses me.
19 Look, my belly is like wine that has no vent;
like new wineskins it is ready to burst.
20 I must speak, that I may find relief;
I must open my lips and answer.
21 Let me not show partiality to any man,
nor flatter any man.
22 For I do not know how to flatter;
otherwise my Maker would soon take me away.”




Chapter 33


1 “But now, Job, hear my speech,
and listen to all my words.
2 Look, I have opened my mouth;
my tongue speaks in my mouth.
3 My words come from an upright heart,
and my lips sincerely declare what they know.
4 The Spirit of GOD has made me,
and the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
5 Answer me if you can;
set your words in order before me; take your stand.
6 Look, I am before you like you are;
I too was pinched off from a piece of clay.
7 See, no fear of me will terrify you,
nor will my pressure be heavy upon you.
8 Surely you have spoken in my hearing,
and I have heard the sound of your words, saying,
9 ‘I am pure, without transgression;
I am clean, and there is no guilt in me.
10 Yet He finds reasons against me;
He counts me as His enemy.
11 He puts my feet in the stocks;
He watches all my paths.’
12 Surely this is not right—I will answer you,
for GOD is greater than man.
13 Why do you contend with Him,
saying He gives no answer concerning His matters?
14 For GOD speaks in one way, and in another,
yet man does not perceive it.
15 In a dream, a vision of the night,
when deep sleep falls upon men
as they slumber on their beds,
16 then He opens the ears of men
and seals their instruction,
17 to turn man from his deeds
and keep pride from him,
18 to spare his soul from the pit,
and his life from passing by the sword.
19 Or he is chastened with pain on his bed,
and with continual strife in his bones,
20 so that his life loathes bread,
and his soul his favorite food.
21 His flesh wastes away so that it cannot be seen,
and his bones, once hidden, stick out.
22 His soul draws near the pit,
and his life to those who bring death.
23 If there is for him an angel,
a mediator, one out of a thousand,
to declare to man what is right for him,
24 then He is gracious to him and says,
‘Deliver him from going down to the pit;
I have found a ransom.’
25 His flesh shall be fresher than in youth;
he shall return to the days of his vigor.
26 He shall pray to GOD, and He will accept him;
he shall see His face with joy,
and He restores to man his righteousness.
27 He will sing before men and say,
‘I sinned and perverted what was right,
and it was not repaid to me.
28 He redeemed my soul from passing into the pit,
and my life sees the light.’
29 Look, GOD does all these things
twice, even three times with a man,
30 to bring back his soul from the pit,
that he may be lighted with the light of life.
31 Pay attention, Job, listen to me;
be silent, and I will speak.
32 If you have anything to say, answer me;
speak, for I desire to justify you.
33 If not, then listen to me;
be silent, and I will teach you wisdom.”




Chapter 34


1 Hear my words, you wise men; and give ear to me, you men of understanding.
2 For the ear tests words, as the palate tastes food.
3 Let us choose what is right for ourselves; let us know among ourselves what is good.
4 For Job has said, “I am righteous, and God has taken away my right;
5 though I am in the right, I am counted a liar; my wound is incurable, though I have no transgression.”
6 Who is a man like Job, who drinks derision like water,
7 who travels with evildoers and walks with the wicked?
8 For he has said, “A man gains nothing by delighting in God.”


9 Therefore, you men of understanding, hear me: far be it from God to do wrong, and from the Almighty to pervert justice.
10 For He repays a man according to his work, and makes him find according to his ways.
11 Indeed, God will not do wickedly, nor will the Almighty pervert justice.
12 Who gave Him charge over the earth? Or who laid the whole world under His authority?
13 If He should set His heart to it, and gather to Himself His spirit and His breath,
14 all flesh would perish together, and man would return to dust.


15 If you have understanding, hear this; listen to the sound of my words.
16 Shall one who hates justice govern? And will you condemn the righteous God?
17 Does He say to a king, “Rash one”? And to nobles, “Wicked one”?
18 He does not take away His eyes from the mighty; He is not partial to princes; for they are all the work of His hands.
19 In a moment they die, at midnight; the people are shaken and pass away, and the mighty are removed without human hand.


20 His eyes are on their ways, and He sees all their steps.
21 There is no darkness, nor the shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
22 For He will not appoint a time to man for judgment, saying, “Come here, that I may judge you.”
23 He breaks in pieces the mighty without inquiry, and sets others in their place.
24 Therefore He takes note of their ways; He overthrows them in the night, and they are crushed.
25 He strikes them as wicked men in open sight, because they turned aside from following Him, and would not consider any of His ways.
26 So they caused the cry of the poor to come before Him; He hears the cry of the afflicted.
27 When he gives quietness, who then can condemn? And when He hides His face, who then can behold Him, whether it is against a nation or a man?
28 That he should not rule as a godless man, nor be an ensnarer of the people.


29 Anyone may say, “I have endured chastening; I will not offend anymore;
30 teach me what I do not see; if I have done wrong, I will not do it again.”
31 Would you then speakwhat you know, since you reject it? You must choose, not I; therefore say what you know.
32 Men of understanding will tell me, and a wise man who hears me will say:
33 “Job speaks without knowledge, and his words lack insight.”
34 Would that Job were tried to the utmost, because his answers are like those of wicked men!
35 For he adds rebellion to his sin; he claps his hands among us, and multiplies his words against God.




Chapter 35


1 Elihu answered and said:
2 Do you think this is just, that you say, “My righteousness is more than God’s”?
3 For you ask, “What advantage is it to You? What do I gain more than if I had sinned?”
4 I will answer you, and your companions with you.
5 Look up to the heavens and see; look at the skies, which are higher than you.
6 If you have sinned, what do you do against Him? And if your transgressions are many, what do you do to Him?
7 If you are righteous, what do you give Him? Or what does He receive from your hand?
8 Your wickedness only affects a man like yourself, and your righteousness a son of man.


9 Because of the multitude of oppressions they cry out; they call for help because of the power of the mighty.
10 But no one says, “Where is God my Maker, who gives songs in the night,
11 who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth and makes us wiser than the birds of heaven?”
12 There they cry, but He gives no answer, because of the pride of evil men.
13 Surely God will not hear vanity, nor will the Almighty regard it.
14 When you say you do not see Him — the case is before Him, so wait for Him.
15 And now, because there is no one, He has appointed His anger; yet He does not consider great wickedness.
16 But you open your mouth in vanity; you multiply words without knowledge.




Chapter 36


1 Elihu continued and said:
2 Wait a little, and I will show you — there are yet words to say on God’s behalf.
3 I will draw my knowledge from afar; I will ascribe righteousness to my Maker.
4 For truly my words are not false; one who is perfect in knowledge is with you.
5 Look — God is mighty, yet He despises no one; He is mighty in power of understanding.
6 He does not preserve the life of the wicked, but gives justice to the afflicted.
7 He does not remove His eyes from the righteous; He exalts them with kings, and they dwell in honor forever.
8 But if someone is bound in chains, held fast in cords of affliction,
9 he tells them what they have done — that they have sinned arrogantly;
10 he makes them listen to correction, and commands that they turn from iniquity.
11 If they obey and serve Him, they will spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure.
12 But if they do not obey, then they will perish by the sword and die without knowledge.
13 The godless in heart harbor resentment; even when He binds them, they do not cry for help.
14 They die in their youth, among the revelers and prostitutes.
15 Yet He rescues those who suffer in their affliction; He speaks to them in their distress.
16 He draws you from the jaws of distress into a broad place free from restriction, to a table spread with abundance.
17 Yet you are full of judgment due to your wickedness; wrath and justice seize you.
18 Beware that riches do not entice you, and that a large bribe does not turn you aside.
19 Can your wealth keep you from distress, or all your mighty efforts from hard times?
20 Do not long for the night, when people vanish from their homes.
21 Beware of turning to evil, which you seem to prefer to affliction.


22 Look — God is exalted by His power; who is a teacher like Him?
23 Who has prescribed His way for Him, or said, “You have done wrong”?
24 Remember to praise His work, of which men have sung.
25 All mankind has looked on it; men gaze on it from afar.
26 How great is God — beyond our understanding! The number of His years is unsearchable.


27 He draws up the drops of water, which distill as rain for the streams;
28 the clouds pour down their moisture, and abundant showers fall on man.
29 Who can understand the spreading of clouds, or the thunder from His pavilion?
30 Look — He spreads His lightning about Him, and covers the depths of the sea.
31 This is how He governs — by His power He provides food in abundance.
32 He fills His hands with lightning, and commands it to strike its mark.
33 His thunder proclaims it; even the cattle tell of the storm’s approach.




Chapter 37


1 At this my heart trembles
 and leaps out of its place.
2 Listen closely to the rumble of His voice,
 and the sound that comes from His mouth.
3 He lets it loose under all the heavens,
 and His lightning to the ends of the earth.
4 After it a roar sounds;
 He thunders with His majestic voice,
 and He does not restrain the flashes
 when His voice is heard.
5 God thunders wondrously with His voice;
 He does great things that we cannot understand.


6 For He says to the snow, “Fall on the earth,”
 and to the downpour of rain, “Become mighty.”
7 He seals the hand of every man,
 so that all men may know His work.
8 Then the beast goes into its den
 and stays in its lair.
9 The storm-wind comes from its chamber,
 and the cold from the scattering winds.
10 By the breath of God the ice is formed,
 and the wide waters are frozen tight.
11 He loads the thick cloud with moisture;
 His lightning scatters the cloud.
12 It turns around by His guidance,
 to perform all that He commands them
 on the face of the inhabited world.
13 Whether as a rod, or for His land,
 or for loyal love, He causes it to happen.


14 Listen to this, Job;
 stand still and consider the wonders of God.
15 Do you know how God commands them
 and causes His lightning to flash?
16 Do you know the balancing of the clouds,
 the wondrous works of Him who is perfect in knowledge?
17 You whose garments are hot
 when the land is still because of the south wind,
18 can you spread out the sky with Him,
 as strong as a cast metal mirror?


19 Teach us what we should say to Him;
 we cannot arrange our words because of darkness.
20 Should it be told Him that I want to speak?
 Would a man say such a thing and be swallowed up?
21 Now men cannot look at the bright light
 when it is in the clouds,
 when the wind has passed and cleared them.
22 From the north comes a golden radiance;
 around God is awesome majesty.
23 The Almighty — we cannot find Him out;
 He is exalted in power;
 He will not violate justice and great righteousness.
24 Therefore men fear Him;
 He does not regard any who are wise in their own heart.




Chapter 38


1 Then the LORD answered Job out of the whirlwind and said:
2 Who is this that obscures my counsel with words without knowledge?
3 Gird up your loins like a man; I will question you, and you shall answer me.
4 Where were you when I laid the foundations of the earth? Tell me, if you have understanding.
5 Who determined its measurements — surely you know! Or who stretched the line upon it?
6 On what were its bases sunk, or who laid its cornerstone,
7 when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
8 Or who shut in the sea with doors, when it burst out from the womb,
9 when I made the cloud its garment, and thick darkness its swaddling band,
10 and prescribed limits for it, and set bars and doors,
11 and said, “This far you shall come, but no farther; here shall your proud waves stop”?


12 Have you commanded the morning since your days began, and caused the dawn to know its place,
13 that it might take hold of the edges of the earth, and the wicked be shaken out of it?
14 It changes as clay under a seal; and its features stand out like a garment.
15 From the wicked their light is withheld, and the uplifted arm is broken.
16 Have you entered into the springs of the sea, or walked in the recesses of the deep?
17 Have the gates of death been revealed to you, or have you seen the gates of the shadow of death?
18 Have you comprehended the breadth of the earth? Declare, if you know it all.
19 Where is the way to the dwelling of light, and where is the place of darkness,
20 that you may take it to its territory, and that you may know the paths to its home?
21 Surely you know, for you were born then, and the number of your days is great!
22 Have you entered the storehouses of the snow, or have you seen the storehouses of the hail,
23 which I have reserved for the time of trouble, for the day of battle and war?
24 By what way is light distributed, or the east wind scattered over the earth?
25 Who has cleft a channel for the torrents of rain, and a way for the thunderbolt,
26 to bring rain on a land where there is no man, on the desert in which there is no man,
27 to satisfy the waste and desolate land, and to cause the bud of tender grass to spring forth?
28 Has the rain a father? Or who has begotten the drops of dew?
29 From whose womb comes the ice? And the frost of heaven, who gives it birth?
30 The waters become hard like stone, and the surface of the deep is frozen.
31 Can you bind the chains of the Pleiades, or loosen the cords of Orion?
32 Can you lead forth a constellation in its season, or guide the Bear with its cubs?
33 Do you know the ordinances of the heavens? Can you establish their rule on the earth?
34 Can you lift up your voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover you?
35 Can you send forth the lightning, that they may go, and say to you, “Here we are”?
36 Who has put wisdom in the inward parts, or given understanding to the mind?
37 Who can number the clouds by wisdom? Or who can tilt the waterskins of the heavens,
38 when the dust runs into a mass and the clods stick fast together?
39 Can you hunt the prey for the lioness, or satisfy the young lions when they crouch in their dens?
40 Who provides for the raven its prey, when its young ones cry to God, and wander for lack of food?




Chapter 39


1 Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth, or mark when the hinds calve?
2 Can you number the months that they fulfill, or know when they bring forth?
3 They crouch down, they bring out their young, they send forth their pangs, they cast forth their offspring.
4 Their young become strong, they grow up in the open field, they go forth, yet do not return to them.


5 Who set free the wild donkey? Who loosened his bonds?
6 Whose house I made the wilderness, and salt land his pasture.
7 He laughs at the tumult of the city; he does not hear the shouts of the driver.
8 He ranges the mountains as his pasture and searches after every green thing.


9 Will the wild ox consent to serve you? Will he spend the night at your crib?
10 Can you bind him in the furrow with a harness, or will he harrow the valleys after you?
11 Will you trust him because his strength is great, or will you leave to him your labor?
12 Will you believe him that he will bring home your seed, and gather it to your threshing floor?


13 The wings of the ostrich flap joyfully, but are her feathers and plumage like the stork’s?
14 She leaves her eggs on the ground and warms them in the dust.
15 She forgets that a foot may crush them, or that wild beasts may trample them.
16 She treats her young harshly, as though they were not hers; though her labor is in vain, she has no fear,
 because God has deprived her of wisdom and has not given her understanding.
17 When she lifts herself on high, she laughs at the horse and his rider.


18 Do you give the horse his might? Do you clothe his neck with a flowing mane?
19 Do you lead him like a locust? His majestic snorting is terrifying.
20 He paws in the valley and rejoices in his strength; he goes out to meet the weapons.
21 He laughs at fear and is not frightened; he does not turn back from the sword.
22 He quivers at the blast of the trumpet; he hears the clash of the javelin and the spear.
23 He says among the trumpets, “Ha!” He smells the battle from afar, the thunder of captains and shouting.


24 Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars, stretching her wings toward the south?
25 Is it at your command that the eagle mounts up and makes her nest on high?
26 She dwells and abides on the rock, on the crag of the cliff, a stronghold.
27 From there she spies out the prey; her eyes behold it from far away.
28 Her young also suck up blood; where the slain are, there she is.




Chapter 40


1 The LORD answered Job and said,
2 Will the faultfinder contend with the Almighty?
 Let him who argues with God answer it.


3 Job answered the LORD and said,
4 Look, I am insignificant—what can I reply to you?
 I lay my hand over my mouth.
5 I have spoken once, and I will not answer;
 twice, but I will say no more.


6 Then the LORD answered Job from the storm and said,
7 Gird up your loins like a man;
 I will question you, and you will inform me.
8 Will you indeed annul my justice?
 Will you condemn me so that you may be right?
9 Do you have an arm like God’s,
 or can you thunder with a voice like his?
10 Adorn yourself now with majesty and exaltation,
 and clothe yourself with honor and splendor.
11 Pour out the overflowings of your anger,
 and look on every proud man and bring him low.
12 Look on every proud man and humble him,
 and tread down the wicked where they stand.
13 Hide them together in the dust;
 bind their faces in secret.
14 Then I, even I, will acknowledge to you
 that your own right hand can save you.


15 Look now at Behemoth, which I made as I made you;
 he eats grass like the ox.
16 Look, his strength is in his loins,
 and his power in the muscles of his belly.
17 He stiffens his tail like a cedar;
 the sinews of his thighs are knit together.
18 His bones are tubes of bronze;
 his limbs are like bars of iron.
19 He is the first of the ways of God;
 only his Maker can draw near with a sword.
20 For the mountains yield food for him,
 and all the beasts of the field play there.
21 He lies under the lotus plants,
 hidden in the reeds and the marsh.
22 The lotus plants cover him with their shade;
 the poplars of the river surround him.
23 Look, if the river rages, he is not alarmed;
 he is confident, though the Jordan should surge against his mouth.
24 Shall anyone capture him with open eyes,
 or pierce his nose with snares?




Chapter 41


1 Can you draw Leviathan out with a hook, or press down his tongue with a cord?
2 Can you put a rope in his nose, or pierce his jaw with a hook?
3 Will he make many pleas to you? Will he speak softly to you?
4 Will he make a covenant with you, to become your servant forever?
5 Will you play with him like a bird, or will you bind him for your maidens?
6 Will traders bargain over him? Will they divide him among the merchants?
7 Can you fill his skin with harpoons, or his head with fishing spears?
8 Lay your hand on him; think of the battle; you will not do it again.
9 See how his hope is false; even at his sight he is despised.
10 No man is so fierce that he dares to stir him up; who then is able to stand before me?
11 Who has first given to me, that I should repay him? Whatever is under the whole heaven is mine.
12 I will not be quiet concerning his limbs, or his mighty strength, or his graceful parts.
13 Who can uncover the face of his garment? Who can come near to his double bridle?
14 Who can open the doors of his face? Around his teeth is terror.
15 His back is made of rows of shields, tightly sealed together.
16 Each is so close to the next that no wind can pass between them;
17 they are joined so that one cannot part them.
18 His sneezings flash forth light, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the dawn.
19 Flames pour forth from his mouth; burning coals leap forth.
20 Smoke goes out of his nostrils, as from a boiling pot and burning rushes.
21 His breath kindles coals, and a flame goes out of his mouth.
22 His neck is strong under him, and his heart is firm as a stone.
23 When he raises himself up, the mighty are terrified; they retreat in horror.
24 The sword that reaches him cannot hold, nor the spear, the dart, or the javelin.
25 He considers iron like straw, and bronze like rotten wood.
26 The arrow cannot make him flee; for him, sling stones are turned to stubble.
27 Clubs are counted as stubble; he laughs at the rattle of javelins.
28 His undersides are like sharp potsherds; he spreads out like a threshing sledge on the mire.
29 He makes the deep boil like a pot; he makes the sea like a jar of ointment.
30 Behind him he makes a path, shining with terror; the deep is like the surface of a boiling oil.
31 Nothing on earth is like him, a creature without fear.
32 He looks down on all that are haughty; he is king over all the sons of pride.




Chapter 42


1 Then Job answered the LORD and said:
I know that you can do everything,
and no purpose of yours can be thwarted.
2 “You said, ‘Who is this who darkens counsel
without knowledge?’
Therefore I declared what I did not understand,
things too wondrous for me, which I did not know.
3 You said, ‘Listen now, and I will speak;
I will question you, and you will make me know.’
4 I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear,
but now my eye has seen you.
5 Therefore I despise myself,
and I repent in dust and ashes.


7 And after the LORD had spoken these words to Job, the LORD said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My wrath is burning against you and against your two friends, for you have not spoken what is right about me, as my servant Job has.
8 So now take for yourselves seven bulls and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up a burnt offering for yourselves, and my servant Job will pray for you, for I will accept him so that I do not deal with you according to your folly, for you have not spoken what is right about me, as my servant Job has.”
9 So Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite went and did as the LORD had told them, and the LORD accepted Job.


10 Then the LORD restored what Job had lost when he prayed for his friends, and the LORD increased all that Job had twofold.
11 And all his brothers, all his sisters, and all who had known him before came to him and ate a meal with him in his house, and they showed him sympathy and comforted him for all the trouble the LORD had brought upon him, and each one gave him a kesitah and a gold ring.
12 And the LORD blessed the latter days of Job more than his beginning, and he had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-asses.
13 And he had seven sons and three daughters.
14 And he called the name of the first Jemimah, the name of the second Keziah, and the name of the third Keren-happuch.
15 And no women were found in all the land as beautiful as the daughters of Job, and their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers.
16 And Job lived after this one hundred forty years, and he saw his sons and his grandsons, four generations.
17 And Job died, old and full of days.