Psalms


Chapter 1


1 Blessed is the man
who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked,
nor stand in the way of sinners,
nor sit in the seat of scoffers.
2 But his delight is in the law of the Lord,
and on His law he meditates day and night.
3 He is like a tree planted by streams of water,
which produces fruit in due season,
its leaf does not wither;
and he prospers in all that he does.


4 The wicked are not so,
rather, they are like chaff driven away by the wind.
5 Therefore the wicked will not stand on the day of judgment,
nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
6 For the Lord knows the way of the righteous,
but the path of the wicked will fail.




Chapter 2


1 Why do the nations conspire
and the peoples plot in vain?  
2 The kings of the earth take their stand,
and the rulers gather together
against the Lord and against His Messiah, saying,  
3 "Let us tear off their shackles
and throw off their cords from us."  
4 The one sitting in heaven laughs;
the Lord mocks them.  
5 Then He speaks to them in His anger
and terrifies them in His wrath:  
6 "I have installed My king
on Zion, My holy mountain."  


7 I will proclaim this decree, the Lord said to me,
"You are My son; today I have begotten you.  
8 Ask of Me, and I will give the nations as your inheritance
and the ends of the earth as your possession.  
9 You will break them with a rod of iron;
you will shatter them like pottery."  


10 Now therefore, O kings, be wise;
be warned, O rulers of the earth.  
11 Serve the Lord with fear
and rejoice with trembling.  
12 Kiss the son,
lest in His anger, you perish in the way,
for his wrath is quickly kindled.
Blessed are all who take refuge in him.




Chapter 3


1 Lord, how many are my foes!
Many rise up against me;  
2 many say about me,
“There is no salvation for him in God.” Selah  


3 But You, O Lord, are a shield around me,
my glory, and the One who lifts my head.  
4 I cry aloud to the Lord,
and He answers me from His holy mountain. Selah  


5 I lay down and slept;
I awoke, for the Lord sustains me.  
6 I will not fear the multitudes of people
who have set themselves against me all around.  
7 Arise, O Lord! Save me, O my God!
For You strike all my enemies on the jaw;
You break the teeth of the wicked.  
8 Salvation belongs to the Lord;
may Your blessing be upon Your people. Selah




Chapter 4


1 Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness! You have given me relief when I was in distress; be gracious to me and hear my prayer.  
2 O sons of men, how long will you turn my glory into shame? How long will you love vanity and seek after lies?  
3 But know that the Lord has set apart the godly man for Himself; the Lord hears when I call to Him.  
4 Tremble, and do not sin; meditate in your heart upon your bed and be still.  


5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness and trust in the Lord.  
6 Many say, “Who will show us any good?” Lift up the light of Your face upon us, O Lord!  
7 You have put joy in my heart, more than when their grain and new wine abound.  
8 In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for You alone, O Lord, make me dwell in safety.




Chapter 5


1 Give ear to my words, O Lord;  
    consider my groaning.  


2 Listen to the sound of my cry,  
    my King and my God,  
    for to You I pray.  


3 In the morning, O Lord, You hear my voice;  
    in the morning I lay my request before You and watch expectantly.  


4 For You are not a God who delights in wickedness;  
    evil does not dwell with You.  


5 The boastful will not stand before Your eyes;  
    You hate all who do iniquity.  


6 You destroy those who speak lies;  
    the Lord abhors the man of bloodshed and deceit.  


7 But as for me, by Your great mercy I will enter Your house;  
    in fear of You, I will bow down toward Your holy temple.  


8 Lead me, O Lord, in Your righteousness because of my enemies;  
    make Your way straight before me.  


9 For there is no truth in their mouth;  
    their heart is destruction itself;  
    their throat is an open grave;  
    with their tongue they speak deceit.  


10 Make them bear their guilt, O God;  
    let them fall by their own schemes.  
    Cast them out for their many transgressions,  
    for they have rebelled against You.  


11 But let all who take refuge in You rejoice;  
    let them sing for joy forever.  
    Spread Your protection over them,  
    that those who love Your name may exult in You.  


12 For You bless the righteous, O Lord;  
    You surround him with favor as with a shield.  




Chapter 6


1 O Lord, do not rebuke me in Your anger,
    nor discipline me in Your wrath.  


2 Be gracious to me, O Lord, for I am weak;
    heal me, O Lord, for my bones are troubled.  


3 My soul also is greatly troubled;
   but You, O Lord—how long?  


4 Turn, O Lord, deliver my soul;
    save me because of Your steadfast love.  


5 For in death there is no remembrance of You;
    in the grave, who will give You praise?  


6 I am weary with my groaning;
    every night I flood my bed with tears;
    I drench my couch with my weeping.  


7 My eye wastes away because of grief;
    it grows weak because of all my foes.  


8 Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity,
    for the Lord has heard the sound of my weeping.  


9 The Lord has heard my plea;
    the Lord accepts my prayer.  


10 All my enemies shall be ashamed and greatly troubled;
   they shall turn back and be put to shame in a moment.




Chapter 7


1 O LORD my God, in You I take refuge;  
save me from all who pursue me, and deliver me,  
2 lest he tear my soul like a lion,  
rending it in pieces with no one to rescue.


3 O LORD my God, if I have done this,  
if there is injustice in my hands,  
4 if I have repaid evil to him who was at peace with me  
or plundered my enemy without cause—  
5 let the enemy pursue my soul and overtake it,  
let him trample my life to the ground  
and lay my glory in the dust. Selah


6 Arise, O LORD, in Your anger;  
lift Yourself up against the fury of my adversaries;  
awake for me—You have commanded judgment.  
7 Let the assembly of the peoples gather around You,  
and over it return on high.


8 The LORD judges the peoples;  
judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness  
and according to my integrity within me.  
9 Let the evil of the wicked come to an end, but establish the righteous—  
for the righteous God tests the hearts and minds.


10 My shield is with God,  
who saves the upright in heart.  
11 God is a righteous judge,  
and a God who has indignation every day.


12 If a man does not repent, He sharpens His sword;  
He has bent His bow and made it ready.  
13 He has prepared His deadly weapons;  
He makes His arrows fiery shafts.


14 Behold, he is pregnant with wickedness:
he conceives trouble and gives birth to falsehood.  
15 He dug a pit and hollowed it out,  
and has fallen into the hole he made.  
16 His trouble returns upon his own head,  
and his violence comes down upon his own skull.


17 I will give thanks to the LORD according to His righteousness,  
and will sing praise to the name of the LORD Most High.  




Chapter 8


1  O LORD, our Lord,  
how majestic is Your name in all the earth,  
You who have set Your splendor above the heavens!


2  Out of the mouth of infants and nursing babies  
You have established strength  
because of Your adversaries,  
to silence the enemy and the avenger.


3  When I look at Your heavens, the work of Your fingers,  
the moon and the stars, which You have set in place—


4  what is man that You take thought of him,  
and the son of man that You care for him?


5  Yet You have made him a little lower than the heavenly beings,  
and crowned him with glory and honor.


6  You have given him dominion over the works of Your hands;  
You have put all things under his feet:


7  all sheep and oxen,  
and also the beasts of the field,


8  the birds of the heavens, and the fish of the sea,  
whatever passes through the paths of the seas.


9  O LORD, our Lord,  
how majestic is Your name in all the earth!




Chapter 9


1 I will give thanks to the LORD with my whole heart; I will recount all Your wondrous deeds.  
2 I will be glad and rejoice in You; I will sing praise to Your name, O Most High.  


3 When my enemies turn back, they stumble and perish before You.  
4 For You have upheld my right and my cause; You sat on the throne judging justly.  
5 You rebuked the nations; You destroyed the wicked; You blotted out their name forever and ever.  
6 The enemy came to an end in everlasting ruins; their cities You uprooted— even the memory of them has perished.  


7 But the LORD sits enthroned forever; He has established His throne for judgment.  
8 He will judge the world with righteousness; He will execute judgment on the peoples with equity.  


9 The LORD is a stronghold for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble.  
10 Those who know Your name trust in You, for You have not forsaken those who seek You, O LORD.  


11 Sing praises to the LORD, who dwells in Zion! Proclaim His deeds among the nations.  
12 For He who avenges blood remembers them; He does not forget the cry of the afflicted.  


13 Be gracious to me, O LORD! See my affliction from those who hate me, You who lift me up from the gates of death,  
14 that I may recount all Your praises, in the gates of the daughter of Zion, that I may rejoice in Your salvation.  


15 The nations have sunk into the pit they made; their foot is caught in the net they hid.  
16 The LORD is known by the judgment He carries out; the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.  


17 The wicked will return to the grave, all the nations that forget God.  
18 For the needy shall not always be forgotten, and the hope of the poor shall never perish.  


19 Arise, O LORD! Let not man prevail; let the nations be judged before You!  
20 Put them in fear, O LORD; let the nations know they are but men. Selah.


Chapter 10


1 Why, O LORD, do You stand far off? Why do You hide Yourself in times of trouble?
2 In his pride the wicked hunts down the afflicted; let them be caught in the schemes they have devised.


3 For the wicked boasts of the desires of his soul; the greedy man curses and despises the LORD.
4 In the arrogance of his face the wicked does not seek Him; all his thoughts are, “There is no God.”


5 His ways always prosper; Your judgments are far above, out of his sight; as for all his foes, he snorts at them.
6 He says in his heart, “I shall not be moved; through all generations I shall not meet adversity.”


7 His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and oppression; under his tongue are mischief and iniquity.
8 He sits in ambush near the villages; in hidden places he murders the innocent. His eyes watch closely for the helpless.


9 He lies in wait in secret like a lion in his thicket; he lies in ambush to seize the afflicted; he seizes the afflicted when he draws them into his net.
10 He crouches, he bows down, and the helpless fall by his might.


11 He says in his heart, “God has forgotten, He hides His face, He will never see.”
12 Arise, O LORD! O God, lift up Your hand; do not forget the afflicted.


13 Why does the wicked despise God and say in his heart, “You will not call to account”?
14 But You do see, for You behold trouble and vexation to take it into Your hand. To You the helpless commits himself; You are the helper of the fatherless.


15 Break the arm of the wicked and the evildoer; call his wickedness to account until You find none.
16 The LORD is King forever and ever; the nations perish from His land.


17 O LORD, You hear the desire of the humble; You will strengthen their heart; You will incline Your ear
18 to give justice to the fatherless and the oppressed, so that man who is of the earth may terrify no more.




Chapter 11


1 In the Lord I have taken refuge; how can you say to my soul,  
“Flee to your mountain like a bird”?
2 For behold, the wicked bend the bow;  
they have set their arrow on the string  
to shoot in the dark at the upright in heart.
3 If the foundations are torn down,  
what can the righteous do?
4 The Lord is in His holy temple;  
the Lord—His throne is in heaven.  
His eyes behold,  
His eyelids test the sons of man.
5 The Lord tests the righteous,  
in His inmost being he hates the wicked and the one who loves violence.
6 He will rain down snares on the wicked:  
fire and brimstone and a scorching wind  
will be the portion of their cup.
7 For the Lord is righteous; He loves righteous deeds;  
the upright shall behold His face.


Chapter 12


1 Save, O LORD, for the godly man has come to an end;  
    the faithful have vanished from among the sons of man.  
2 Everyone speaks falsehood with his neighbor;  
    with flattering lips and a double heart they speak.


3 May the LORD cut off all flattering lips,  
    the tongue that boasts great things—  
4 those who have said, “By our tongue we will prevail;  
    our lips are with us—who is master over us?”


5 “Because of the oppression of the poor,  
    because of the groaning of the needy,  
    now I will arise,” says the LORD;  
    “I will set him in safety, the one who longs for it.”


6 The words of the LORD are pure words,  
    like silver refined in a crucible on the ground,  
    purified seven times.


7 You, O LORD, will keep them;  
    You will guard him from this generation forever.  
8 The wicked strut about on every side,  
    when vileness is exalted among the sons of man.


Chapter 13


1 How long, O LORD? Will You forget me forever?  
How long will You hide Your face from me?  
2 How long must I take counsel in my soul,  
and have sorrow in my heart all day long?  
How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?  


3 Look upon me and answer, O LORD my God.  
Give light to my eyes, lest I sleep in death,  
4 lest my enemy say, “I have prevailed over him,”  
and my foes rejoice because I am shaken.  


5 But I have trusted in Your steadfast love;  
my heart shall rejoice in Your salvation.  
6 I will sing to the LORD,  
for He has dealt bountifully with me.


Chapter 14


1 The fool says in his heart, “There is no God.”
They are corrupt; they do vile deeds.
There is no one who does good.
2 The Lord looks down from heaven upon the sons of man
To see if there is anyone who understands, anyone who seeks after God.


3 All have turned aside; together they have become corrupt.
There is no one who does good—no, not even one.
4 Do all the workers of iniquity not know, who eat up my people as they eat bread and do not call upon the Lord?


5 There they are in great dread, for God is with the righteous generation.
6 You would put to shame the counsel of the poor, but the Lord is his refuge.
7 Oh that the salvation of Israel would come out of Zion!
When the Lord restores the fortunes of His people, Jacob shall rejoice;
Israel shall be glad.




Chapter 15


1 O Lord, who may dwell in your tent?  
Who may live on your holy mountain?
2 He who walks blamelessly and does what is right,  
who speaks the truth from his heart,
3 who does not slander with his tongue,  
does no harm to his neighbor,  
and does not cast reproach on his friend;
4 in whose eyes a vile man is despised,  
but who honors those who fear the Lord;  
who swears to his own hurt and does not change;
5 who does not lend his money at interest  
and does not accept a bribe against the innocent.  
He who does these things shall never be shaken.




Chapter 16


1 Preserve me, O God, for I take refuge in You.  
2 I said to the LORD, “You are my Lord;
    I have no good apart from You.”  
3 As for the holy ones who are in the land,
    they are the noble ones in whom is all my delight.  
4 The sorrows of those who chase after another god will multiply;
    I will not pour out their drink offerings of blood,
    nor will I take their names upon my lips.  


5 The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup;
   You hold my lot.  
6 The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places;
     indeed, I have a beautiful inheritance.  


7 I will bless the LORD who gives me counsel;
    in the night also my conscience instructs me.  
8 I have set the LORD always before me;
    because He is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.  


9 Therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoices;
    my flesh also dwells secure.  
10 For You will not abandon my soul to the grave,
    nor will You let Your holy one see decay.  
11 You make known to me the path of life;
    in Your presence is fullness of joy;
    at Your right hand are pleasures forevermore.




Chapter 17


1 Hear, O LORD, my just cause; attend to my cry;
    give ear to my prayer from lips without deceit.  
2 Let my vindication come from your presence;
    let your eyes behold what is right.  


3 You have tested my heart, you have visited me by night,
    you have tried me and found nothing;
    I have purposed that my mouth will not transgress.  
4 As for the deeds of men, by the word of your lips
    I have avoided the paths of the violent.  
5 My steps have held fast to your paths;
    my feet have not slipped.  


6 I call upon you, for you will answer me, O God;
    incline your ear to me; hear my words.  
7 Show the wonder of your steadfast love, O Savior
    to those who seek refuge from their adversaries at your right hand.  
8 Keep me as the apple of the eye;
    hide me in the shadow of your wings,  
9 from the wicked who do me violence,
    my deadly enemies who surround me.  


10 They close their hearts to pity;
    with their mouths they speak arrogantly.  
11 They have now surrounded our steps;
    they set their eyes to cast us down to the ground.  
12 He is like a lion eager to tear,
    like a young lion lurking in hiding places.  


13 Arise, O LORD, confront him, bring him low;
    deliver my soul from the wicked by your sword,  
14 from men, by your hand, O LORD, from men of the world whose portion is in this life.
    You fill their belly with your treasure;
    they are satisfied with children and leave their abundance to their infants.  


15 As for me, I shall behold your face in righteousness;
    when I awake, I shall be satisfied with your likeness.




Chapter 18


1 I love you, O LORD, my strength.  
2 The LORD is my rock, my fortress, and my deliverer,
    my God, my rock in whom I take refuge, my shield,
    and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold.  
3 I call upon the LORD, who is worthy of praise,
    and I am saved from my enemies.  


4 The cords of death encompassed me;
    the torrents of destruction overwhelmed me.  
5 The cords of the grave entangled me;
    the snares of death confronted me.  
6 In my distress I called upon the LORD,
    and to my God I cried for help.
    From His temple He heard my voice,
    and my cry before Him came into His ears.  


7 Then the earth shook and quaked;
    the foundations of the mountains trembled
    and were shaken, because He was angry.  
8 Smoke went up from His nostrils, and devouring fire from His mouth;
    glowing coals blazed forth from Him.  
9 He bowed the heavens and came down;
    thick darkness was under His feet.  
10 He rode on a cherub and flew;
    He came swiftly on the wings of the wind.  
11 He made darkness His covering, His canopy
    around Him, thick clouds, dark with water.  
12 From the brightness before Him, hailstones and coals of fire passed through His clouds.  
13 The LORD thundered from the heavens,
    and the Most High uttered His voice, hailstones and coals of fire.  
14 He sent out His arrows and scattered them;
    He flashed forth lightning and routed them.  
15 Then the channels of the sea were exposed,
    and the foundations of the world were laid bare
    at Your rebuke, O LORD, at the blast of the breath of Your nostrils.  


16 He reached down from on high and took hold of me;
    He drew me out of many waters.  
17 He rescued me from my powerful enemy,
    and from those who hated me, for they were too strong for me.  
18 They confronted me in the day of my calamity,
    but the LORD was my support.  
19 He brought me out into a spacious place;
    He rescued me because He delighted in me.  


20 The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness;
    according to the cleanness of my hands He repaid me.  
21 For I have kept the ways of the LORD,
    and have not wickedly departed from my God.  
22 For all His judgments were before me,
    and I did not put away His statutes from me.  
23 I was blameless before Him, and I kept myself from guilt.  
24 So the LORD has repaid me according to my righteousness,
    according to the cleanness of my hands in His sight.  


25 With the merciful You show Yourself merciful;
    with the blameless man You show Yourself blameless;  
26 with the pure You show Yourself pure,
    and with the crooked You make Yourself seem shrewd.  
27 For You save a humble people,
    but the haughty eyes You bring down.  
28 For it is You who light my lamp;
    the LORD my God illumines my darkness.  


29 For by You I can run against a troop,
    and by my God I can leap over a wall.  
30 This God—His way is perfect; the word of the LORD proves true;
    He is a shield for all who take refuge in Him.  
31 For who is God but the LORD?
    And who is a rock except our God?  


32 The God who girds me with strength and makes my way blameless,  
33 He makes my feet like the feet of a deer and sets me secure on the heights.  
34 He trains my hands for war, so that my arms can bend a bow of bronze.  
35 You have given me the shield of Your salvation,
    and Your right hand upheld me, and Your gentleness made me great.  
36 You gave a wide place beneath my steps, and my feet did not slip.  


37 I pursued my enemies and overtook them;
    I did not turn back until they were consumed.  
38 I struck them down so that they were not able to rise;
    they fell under my feet.  
39 For You girded me with strength for the battle;
    You made those who rose against me sink under me.  
40 You made my enemies turn their backs to me,
    and those who hated me I destroyed.  
41 They cried for help, but there was none to save;
    they cried to the LORD, but He did not answer them.  
42 I beat them fine as dust before the wind;
    I cast them out like the mire of the streets.  


43 You delivered me from the strife of the people;
    You made me the head of the nations;
    a people I had not known served me.  
44 As soon as they heard of me, they obeyed me;
    foreigners came cringing to me.  
45 Foreigners lost heart and came trembling from their strongholds.  


46 The LORD lives, and blessed be my rock,
    and exalted be the God of my salvation—  
47 the God who gave me vengeance and subdued nations under me,  
48 who delivered me from my enemies;
    indeed, You exalted me above those who rose against me;
    You rescued me from the man of violence.  


49 Therefore I will give thanks to You, O LORD, among the nations,
    and sing praises to Your name.  
50 He gives great salvation to His king, and shows steadfast love to His anointed,
    to David and his offspring forever.




Chapter 19


1 The heavens declare the glory of God,  
 and the sky above proclaims the work of his hands.  
2 Day to day pours forth speech,  
 and night to night reveals knowledge.  
3 There is no speech, nor are there words;  
 their voice is not heard.  
4 Yet their line goes out through all the earth,  
 and their words to the end of the world.  
In them he has set a tent for the sun,  
5 which comes out like a bridegroom leaving his chamber,  
 and, like a strong man, runs its course with joy.  
6 Its rising is from the end of the heavens,  
 and its circuit to the end of them,  
 and there is nothing hidden from its heat.


7 The law of the LORD is perfect, restoring the soul;  
 the testimony of the LORD is trustworthy, making the simple wise.  
8 The precepts of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart;  
 the commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the eyes.  
9 The fear of the LORD is clean, enduring forever;  
 the judgments of the LORD are true and altogether righteous.  
10 More to be desired are they than gold, even much fine gold;  
 sweeter also than honey and drippings from the honeycomb.  
11 Moreover, by them your servant is warned;  
 in keeping them there is great reward.


12 Who can discern his errors?  
 Cleanse me from hidden faults.  
13 Keep back your servant also from presumptuous sins;  
 let them not have dominion over me.  
Then I shall be blameless,  
 and innocent of great transgression.


14 Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart  
 be acceptable in your sight,  
 O LORD, my rock and my redeemer.




Chapter 20


1 May the LORD answer you in the day of trouble;
    may the name of the God of Jacob protect you.
2 May He send you help from the sanctuary and support you from Zion.
3 May He remember all your offerings and regard with favor your burnt sacrifices. Selah.


4 May He grant you your heart’s desire and fulfill all your plans.
5 We will shout for joy over your salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our banners.
May the LORD fulfill all your petitions.
6 Now I know that the LORD saves His anointed;
He will answer him from His holy heaven with the saving might of His right hand.


7 Some trust in chariots and some in horses, but we trust in the name of the LORD our God.
8 They collapse and fall, but we rise and stand upright.
9 O LORD, save the king! May He answer us when we call.




Chapter 21


1 O LORD, the king rejoices in Your strength, and how greatly he exults in Your salvation!  
2 You have granted him the desire of his heart and have not withheld the request of his lips.  
3 For You come to meet him with blessings of good things; You set a crown of pure gold upon his head.  


4 He asked You for life, and You gave it to him—length of days, forever and ever.  
5 His glory is great through Your salvation; You bestow majesty and splendor upon him.  
6 For You make him most blessed forever; You make him glad with the joy of Your presence.  


7 For the king trusts in the LORD, and through the steadfast love of the Most High he shall not be shaken.  


8 Your hand will find out all Your enemies; Your right hand will seize those who hate You.  
9 You will make them like a fiery furnace at the time of Your appearing. The LORD will swallow them up in His wrath, and fire will consume them.  
10 You will destroy their offspring from the earth, and their descendants from among the sons of man.  
11 Though they plan evil against You, though they devise schemes, they will not succeed.  
12 For You will put them to flight; You will aim Your bow at their faces.  


13 Be exalted, O LORD, in Your strength! We will sing and praise Your power.




Chapter 22


1 My God, my God, why have You forsaken me?  
Why are You so far from saving me,  
from the words of my groaning?
2 My God, I call out by day, but You do not answer;  
and by night—but I find no rest.


3 Yet You are holy,  
enthroned upon the praises of Israel.
4 In You our fathers trusted;  
they trusted, and You delivered them.


5 To You they cried and were rescued;  
in You they trusted and were not put to shame.
6 But I am a worm and not a man,  
scorned by men and despised by the people.


7 All who see me mock me;  
they open wide their mouths; they wag their heads:
8 “He trusts in the LORD; let Him deliver him;  
let Him rescue him, for He delights in him.”


9 Yet You are the one who brought me out of the womb;  
You made me trust You from my mother's breasts.
10 On You I was cast from birth,  
and from my mother’s womb You have been my God.


11 Do not be far from me,  
for trouble is near,  
and there is no one to help.
12 Many bulls surround me;  
strong bulls of Bashan encircle me.


13 They open wide their mouths at me,  
like a ravenous and roaring lion.
14 I am poured out like water,  
and all my bones are disjointed;  
my heart is like wax—  
it melts within me.


15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd,  
and my tongue clings to my jaws;  
You lay me in the dust of death.
16 For dogs have surrounded me;  
a gang of evildoers has encircled me;  
they have pierced my hands and feet.


17 I can count all my bones—  
they look, they stare at me.
18 They divide my garments among themselves,  
and for my clothing they cast lots.


19 But You, O LORD, do not be far off!  
O my strength, come quickly to help me!
20 Deliver my soul from the sword,  
my precious life from the power of the dog.


21 Save me from the lion’s mouth,  
and from the horns of wild oxen—You have answered me.
22 I will declare Your name to my brothers;  
in the midst of the congregation I will praise You.


23 You who fear the LORD, praise Him!  
All you descendants of Jacob, glorify Him;  
and stand in awe of Him, all you descendants of Israel!
24 For He has not despised nor abhorred  
the affliction of the afflicted,  
and He has not hidden His face from him,  
but when he cried to Him, He heard.


25 From You comes my praise in the great congregation;  
my vows I will fulfill before those who fear Him.
26 The afflicted shall eat and be satisfied;  
those who seek Him shall praise the LORD.  
May your heart live forever!


27 All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to the LORD,  
and all the families of the nations shall bow down before You.
28 For the kingdom is the LORD’s,  
and He rules over the nations.


29 All the prosperous of the earth shall eat and bow down;  
all who go down to the dust shall bow before Him—  
even he who could not keep his soul alive.
30 Posterity shall serve Him;  
it shall be told of the Lord to the coming generation.
31 They shall come and proclaim His righteousness  
to a people yet to be born,  
that He has done it.




Chapter 23


1 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall lack nothing.
2 He makes me lie down in green pastures; He leads me beside still waters.
3 He restores my soul; He guides me in paths of righteousness for His name’s sake.
4 Even though I walk through the valley of deep darkness, I will fear no evil, for You are with me; Your rod and Your staff, they comfort me.
5 You prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies; You anoint my head with oil; my cup overflows.
6 Surely goodness and lovingkindness shall pursue me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord forever.




Chapter 24


1 The earth is the Lord’s, and all that fills it, the world and those who dwell in it.  
2 For He founded it upon the seas and established it upon the rivers.


3 Who may ascend the mountain of the Lord? And who may stand in His holy place?  
4 He who has clean hands and a pure heart, who has not lifted up his soul to falsehood and has not sworn deceitfully.  
5 He shall receive blessing from the Lord and righteousness from the God of his salvation.  
6 This is the generation of those who seek Him, who seek Your face—O God of Jacob.


7 Lift up your heads, O gates, and be lifted up, O ancient doors, that the King of Glory may enter!  
8 Who is this King of Glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.  
9 Lift up your heads, O gates, and lift them up, O ancient doors, that the King of Glory may enter!  
10 Who is this King of Glory? The Lord of hosts—He is the King of Glory.




Chapter 25


1 To You, O LORD, I lift up my soul.  
2 My God, in You I trust; do not let me be put to shame; do not let my enemies exult over me.  
3 Indeed, none who wait for You will be put to shame; they shall be put to shame who act treacherously without cause.


4 Make me know Your ways, O LORD; teach me Your paths.  
5 Lead me in Your truth and teach me, for You are the God of my salvation; for You I wait all the day.  
6 Remember Your mercies, O LORD, and Your steadfast love, for they are from of old.  
7 Do not remember the sins of my youth or my transgressions; according to Your steadfast love remember me, for the sake of Your goodness, O LORD.


8 Good and upright is the LORD; therefore He instructs sinners in the way.  
9 He leads the humble in justice and teaches the humble His way.  
10 All the paths of the LORD are steadfast love and faithfulness to those who keep His covenant and His testimonies.  
11 For the sake of Your name, O LORD, pardon my guilt, for it is great.


12 Who is the man who fears the LORD? This man will be instructed in the way he should choose.  
13 His soul shall abide in prosperity, and his descendants shall inherit the land.  
14 The secret of the LORD is with those who fear Him, and He makes them know His covenant.


15 My eyes are ever toward the LORD, for He will free my feet from the net.  
16 Turn to me and be gracious to me, for I am lonely and afflicted.  
17 The troubles of my heart are enlarged; bring me out of my distresses.  
18 Look upon my affliction and my trouble, and forgive all my sins.  
19 Consider my enemies, for they are many, as are those who hate me with violent hatred.  
20 Guard my soul and deliver me; let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in You.  
21 Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait for You.


22 Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.




Chapter 26


1 Vindicate me, O LORD, for I have walked in my integrity; I have trusted in the LORD without wavering.
2 Examine me, O LORD, and try me; test my kidneys and my heart.
3 For Your steadfast love is before my eyes, and I have walked in Your truth.


4 I do not sit with deceitful men, nor do I go with hypocrites.
5 I hate the assembly of evildoers, and I do not sit with the wicked.


6 I wash my hands in innocence and go around Your altar, O LORD,
7 to proclaim thanksgiving aloud and to recount all Your wondrous deeds.


8 O LORD, I love the habitation of Your house and the place where Your glory dwells.


9 Do not sweep away my soul with sinners, nor my life with men of blood,
10 in whose hands are evil plots and whose right hand is full of bribes.


11 But as for me, I shall walk in my integrity; redeem me and be gracious to me.
12 My foot stands on level ground; in the great assembly I will bless the LORD.




Chapter 27


1 The LORD is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?
The LORD is the stronghold of my life; of whom shall I be afraid?
2 When evildoers draw near against me to devour my flesh,
my adversaries and my enemies, they stumbled and fell.
3 Though an army encamp against me, my heart will not fear;
though war arise against me, even then I will trust.


4 One thing I have asked from the LORD, that I will seek:
to dwell in the house of the LORD all the days of my life,
to behold the beauty of the LORD and to inquire in His temple.


5 For He will hide me in His shelter in the day of trouble;
He will conceal me in the hiding place of His tent;
He will lift me high upon a rock.


6 And now my head shall be lifted up above my enemies all around me,
and I will offer in His tent sacrifices with shouts of joy;
I will sing and make melody to the LORD.
7 Hear, O LORD, my voice when I cry out;
be gracious to me and answer me.


8 On Your behalf my heart has said, “Seek My face.”
Your face, O LORD, I will seek.
9 Do not hide Your face from me;
do not turn Your servant away in anger.
You have been my help; do not forsake me or abandon me,
O God of my salvation.
10 Though my father and my mother have forsaken me,
the LORD will take me in.


11 Teach me Your way, O LORD,
and lead me on a level path because of my foes.
12 Do not give me up to the will of my adversaries,
for false witnesses have risen against me,
and they breathe out violence.
13 I believe that I shall see the goodness of the LORD
in the land of the living.
14 Wait for the LORD; be strong,
and let your heart be courageous;
wait for the LORD.




Chapter 28


1 To You, O LORD, I call;
my rock, do not be deaf to me,
lest, if You be silent to me,
I become like those who go down to the pit.
2 Hear the voice of my supplications when I cry to You,
when I lift up my hands toward Your holy sanctuary.


3 Do not drag me away with the wicked
and with the workers of iniquity,
who speak peace with their neighbors
while evil is in their hearts.
4 Give to them according to their work
and according to the evil of their deeds.
Give to them according to the work of their hands;
render their recompense to them.
5 Because they do not regard the deeds of the LORD
nor the work of His hands,
He will tear them down and not build them up.


6 Blessed be the LORD,
for He has heard the voice of my supplications.
7 The LORD is my strength and my shield;
in Him my heart trusts, and I am helped.
My heart exults,
and with my song I will give thanks to Him.
8 The LORD is the strength of His people;
He is a refuge of salvation for His anointed.
9 Save Your people and bless Your heritage;
shepherd them also and carry them forever.




Chapter 29


1 Ascribe to the LORD, O sons of the mighty,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
2 Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name;
worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness.


3 The voice of the LORD is over the waters;
the God of glory thunders,
the LORD is over many waters.
4 The voice of the LORD is powerful;
the voice of the LORD is full of majesty.


5 The voice of the LORD breaks the cedars;
the LORD shatters the cedars of Lebanon.
6 He makes Lebanon skip like a calf,
and Sirion like a young wild ox.


7 The voice of the LORD hews out flames of fire.
8 The voice of the LORD shakes the wilderness;
the LORD shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
9 The voice of the LORD makes the deer give birth
and strips the forests bare,
and in His temple all cry, “Glory!”


10 The LORD sits enthroned over the flood;
the LORD sits enthroned as king forever.
11 The LORD gives strength to His people;
the LORD blesses His people with peace.




Chapter 30


1 I will exalt You, O LORD, for You have drawn me up
and have not let my enemies rejoice over me.
2 O LORD my God, I cried to You for help,
and You have healed me.
3 O LORD, You have brought me up alive from the grave;
You restored me to life from among those who go down to the pit.


4 Sing praise to the LORD, O you His faithful ones,
and give thanks to His holy name.
5 For His anger is but for a moment,
but His favor is for a lifetime.
Weeping may remain for the night,
but joy comes in the morning.


6 As for me, I said in my prosperity,
“I shall never be moved.”
7 O LORD, by Your favor You made my mountain stand strong;
You hid Your face—I was dismayed.


8 To You, O LORD, I called,
and to the Lord I made supplication:
9 “What gain is there in my death, in my going down to the pit?
Will the dust praise You? Will it declare Your truth?
10 Hear, O LORD, and be gracious to me;
O LORD, be my helper.”


11 You turned my mourning into dancing;
You removed my sackcloth and girded me with gladness,
12 so that my soul may sing praise to You and not be silent.
O LORD my God, I will give thanks to You forever.




Chapter 31


1 In You, O LORD, I have taken refuge;
let me never be put to shame;
in Your righteousness deliver me.
2 Incline Your ear to me;
rescue me speedily.
Be to me a rock of refuge,
a strong fortress to save me.


3 For You are my rock and my fortress;
and for Your name’s sake You will lead me and guide me.
4 You will pull me out of the net that they have hidden for me,
for You are my refuge.
5 Into Your hand I commit my spirit;
You have redeemed me, O LORD, God of truth.


6 I hate those who regard worthless idols,
but I trust in the LORD.
7 I will rejoice and be glad in Your lovingkindness,
because You have seen my affliction;
You have known the distress of my soul,
8 and You have not delivered me into the hand of the enemy;
You have set my feet in a broad place.


9 Be gracious to me, O LORD, for I am in distress;
my eye is wasted from grief,
my soul and my body also.
10 For my life is spent with sorrow
and my years with sighing;
my strength fails because of my iniquity,
and my bones waste away.


11 I am a reproach among all my adversaries,
especially to my neighbors,
and a dread to my acquaintances;
those who see me in the street flee from me.
12 I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind;
I am like a broken vessel.
13 For I have heard the slander of many—
terror on every side!—
as they take counsel together against me;
they scheme to take my life.


14 But I trust in You, O LORD;
I say, “You are my God.”
15 My times are in Your hand;
deliver me from the hand of my enemies
and from those who pursue me.
16 Make Your face shine upon Your servant;
save me in Your lovingkindness.
17 O LORD, let me not be put to shame,
for I call upon You;
let the wicked be put to shame;
let them lie down in the grave.


18 Let the lying lips be mute,
which speak arrogantly against the righteous
with pride and contempt.


19 How great is Your goodness,
which You have stored up for those who fear You,
which You perform for those who take refuge in You
before the sons of men!
20 In the shelter of Your presence You hide them from the schemes of men;
You conceal them in Your pavilion
from the strife of tongues.


21 Blessed be the LORD,
for He has shown me His lovingkindness
in a fortified city.
22 As for me, I said in my alarm,
“I am cut off from before Your eyes.”
Nevertheless, You heard the voice of my supplications
when I cried to You.


23 Love the LORD, all you His saints!
The LORD preserves the faithful
but abundantly repays the one who acts with pride.
24 Be strong, and let your heart take courage,
all you who wait for the LORD.




Chapter 32


1 Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered.
2 Blessed is the man to whom the LORD does not count iniquity,
and in whose spirit there is no deceit.


3 When I kept silent, my bones wasted away
through my groaning all day long.
4 For day and night Your hand was heavy upon me;
my strength was dried up as if by the heat of summer. Selah


5 I acknowledged my sin to You,
and I did not cover my iniquity;
I said, “I will confess my transgressions to the LORD,”
and You forgave the iniquity of my sin. Selah


6 Therefore let everyone who is godly
offer prayer to You at a time when You may be found;
surely in the rush of great waters,
they shall not reach him.
7 You are a hiding place for me;
You preserve me from trouble;
You surround me with shouts of deliverance. Selah


8 I will instruct you and teach you in the way you should go;
I will counsel you with My eye upon you.
9 Do not be like a horse or a mule, without understanding,
which must be curbed with bit and bridle,
or it will not stay near you.


10 Many are the sorrows of the wicked,
but steadfast love surrounds the one who trusts in the LORD.
11 Be glad in the LORD, and rejoice, O righteous,
and shout for joy, all you upright in heart!




Chapter 33


1 Rejoice in the LORD, O righteous!
Praise befits the upright.
2 Give thanks to the LORD with the lyre;
make melody to Him with the harp of ten strings.
3 Sing to Him a new song;
play skillfully with a shout of joy.


4 For the word of the LORD is upright,
and all His work is done in faithfulness.
5 He loves righteousness and justice;
the earth is full of the lovingkindness of the LORD.


6 By the word of the LORD the heavens were made,
and by the breath of His mouth all their host.
7 He gathers the waters of the sea as a heap;
He puts the deeps in storehouses.
8 Let all the earth fear the LORD;
let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of Him.
9 For He spoke, and it came to be;
He commanded, and it stood firm.


10 The LORD brings the counsel of the nations to nothing;
He frustrates the plans of the peoples.
11 The counsel of the LORD stands forever,
the plans of His heart to all generations.
12 Blessed is the nation whose God is the LORD,
the people He has chosen as His inheritance.


13 The LORD looks down from heaven;
He sees all the sons of man;
14 from where He dwells He looks
on all the inhabitants of the earth—
15 He who fashions the hearts of them all,
who considers all their deeds.


16 The king is not saved by the size of his army;
a warrior is not delivered by great strength.
17 The horse is a false hope for salvation,
nor does it deliver by its great might.


18 Behold, the eye of the LORD is on those who fear Him,
on those who hope in His lovingkindness,
19 to deliver their soul from death
and to keep them alive in famine.


20 Our soul waits for the LORD;
He is our help and our shield.
21 For our heart is glad in Him,
because we trust in His holy name.
22 Let Your lovingkindness, O LORD, be upon us,
as we hope in You.




Chapter 34


1 I will bless the LORD at all times;
His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
2 My soul makes its boast in the LORD;
the humble shall hear and be glad.
3 Magnify the LORD with me,
and let us exalt His name together.


4 I sought the LORD, and He answered me
and delivered me from all my fears.
5 They looked to Him and were radiant,
and their faces shall never be ashamed.
6 This poor man cried, and the LORD heard him
and saved him out of all his troubles.
7 The angel of the LORD encamps around those who fear Him
and delivers them.


8 Taste and see that the LORD is good!
Blessed is the man who takes refuge in Him!
9 Fear the LORD, you His saints,
for those who fear Him have no lack.
10 The young lions suffer want and hunger,
but those who seek the LORD lack no good thing.


11 Come, O sons, listen to me;
I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
12 Who is the man who desires life
and loves many days, that he may see good?
13 Keep your tongue from evil
and your lips from speaking deceit.
14 Turn away from evil and do good;
seek peace and pursue it.


15 The eyes of the LORD are toward the righteous
and His ears toward their cry.
16 The face of the LORD is against those who do evil,
to cut off the memory of them from the earth.
17 When the righteous cry for help, the LORD hears
and delivers them out of all their troubles.
18 The LORD is near to the brokenhearted
and saves the crushed in spirit.


19 Many are the afflictions of the righteous,
but the LORD delivers him out of them all.
20 He keeps all his bones;
not one of them is broken.
21 Evil will slay the wicked,
and those who hate the righteous will be condemned.
22 The LORD redeems the soul of His servants;
none of those who take refuge in Him will be condemned.




Chapter 35


1 Contend, O Lord, with those who contend against me;
fight against those who fight me.  
2 Take up shield and armor; rise up and come to my aid.  
3 Draw out the spear and javelin against my pursuers;
say to my soul, “I am your salvation.”  


4 Let those who seek my life be put to shame and dishonored;
let those who plot evil against me be turned back and humiliated.  
5 Let them be like chaff before the wind, with the angel of the Lord driving them away.  
6 Let their path be dark and slippery, with the angel of the Lord pursuing them.  
7 For without cause they hid their net for me;
without reason they dug a pit for my soul.  
8 Let destruction come upon them unexpectedly;
let the net they hid ensnare them; let them fall into their own pit to their ruin.  


9 Then my soul will rejoice in the Lord;
it will delight in His salvation.  
10 All my bones will say, “O Lord, who is like You,
who rescues the poor from those too strong for them,
the poor and needy from those who rob them?”  


11 Malicious witnesses rise up;
they accuse me of things I know nothing about.  
12 They repay me evil for good, leaving my soul bereft.  
13 Yet when they were sick, I put on sackcloth;
I humbled myself with fasting, and my prayer returned to my own heart.  
14 I went about as though grieving for a friend or brother;
I bowed down in mourning, as one lamenting a mother.  
15 But when I stumbled, they rejoiced and gathered together;
they gathered against me, attackers I did not know, tearing at me without ceasing.  
16 Like godless mockers at a feast, they gnashed their teeth at me.  


17 O Lord, how long will You look on?
Rescue my soul from their ravages, my precious life from the lions.  
18 I will give You thanks in the great assembly;
among a mighty throng I will praise You.  


19 Do not let those who are wrongfully my enemies rejoice over me;
do not let those who hate me without cause wink their eyes.  
20 For they do not speak peace, but devise deceitful words against those who are quiet in the land.  
21 They open their mouths wide against me;
they say, “Aha, aha! Our eyes have seen it!”  


22 You have seen this, O Lord; do not remain silent.
O Lord, do not be far from me.  
23 Awake and rise to my defense, to my cause, my God and my Lord.  
24 Vindicate me, O Lord my God, according to Your righteousness,
and do not let them rejoice over me.  
25 Do not let them say in their hearts, “Aha, just what we wanted!”
Do not let them say, “We have swallowed him up.”  
26 Let all who rejoice at my calamity be ashamed and confounded together;
let those who exalt themselves over me be clothed with shame and dishonor.  


27 Let those who delight in my righteousness shout for joy and be glad;
let them say continually, “The Lord be exalted, who delights in the prosperity of His servant.”  
28 And my tongue will proclaim Your righteousness and Your praise all day long.




Chapter 36


1 A declaration of rebellion resides in the heart of the wicked; there is no dread of God before their eyes.
2 For they flatter themselves in their own sight, thinking their guilt will not be uncovered or despised.
3 The words of their mouth are wicked and deceitful; they have stopped acting wisely or doing good.
4 They plot wickedness on their beds; they commit themselves to a crooked path; they do not reject evil.


5 Your steadfast love, O Lord, reaches to the heavens, your faithfulness extends to the clouds.
6 Your righteousness is like the mighty mountains, your judgments are like the vast deep; you preserve both man and beast, O Lord.
7 How precious is your steadfast love, O God! The sons of man take refuge in the shadow of your wings.
8 They feast on the abundance of your house, and you give them drink from the river of your delights.
9 For with you is the fountain of life; in your light we see light.


10 Continue your steadfast love to those who know you, and your righteousness to the upright in heart.
11 Do not let the foot of the arrogant trample me, nor the hand of the wicked drive me away.
12 There the evildoers have fallen; they are thrust down and cannot rise.




Chapter 37


1 Do not be provoked by evildoers; do not be envious of those who do wrong.  
2 For like grass they will soon wither, and like green plants they will fade away.  
3 Trust in the Lord and do good; dwell in the land and cultivate faithfulness.  
4 Delight yourself in the Lord, and He will give you the desires of your heart.  
5 Commit your way to the Lord; trust in Him, and He will act.  
6 He will bring forth your righteousness like the light, and your justice like the noonday sun.  


7 Be still before the Lord and wait patiently for Him; do not be provoked by the man who prospers in his way, by the man who carries out wicked schemes.  
8 Cease from anger and forsake wrath; do not be provoked—it leads only to evil.  
9 For evildoers will be cut off, but those who wait for the Lord will inherit the land.  
10 Yet a little while, and the wicked man will be no more; though you look for his place, he will not be there.  
11 But the humble will inherit the land and will delight in abundant peace.  


12 The wicked man plots against the righteous and gnashes his teeth at him.  
13 The Lord laughs at him, for He sees that his day is coming.  
14 The wicked have drawn the sword and bent their bow to bring down the poor and needy, to slay those whose way is upright.  
15 Their sword will enter their own heart, and their bows will be broken.  


16 Better is the little that the righteous man has than the abundance of many wicked men.  
17 For the arms of the wicked will be broken, but the Lord upholds the righteous.  
18 The Lord knows the days of the blameless, and their inheritance will last forever.  
19 They will not be ashamed        In evil times, and in days of famine they will be satisfied.  
20 But the wicked will perish; the enemies of the Lord, like the glory of the pastures, will vanish—they will vanish like smoke.  


21 The wicked man borrows and does not repay, but the righteous man is gracious and gives.  
22 For those blessed by Him will inherit the land, but those cursed by Him will be cut off.  
23 The steps of a man are established by the Lord, and He delights in his way.  
24 Though he falls, he will not be cast down, for the Lord upholds his hand.  


25 I have been young, and now I am old, yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken or his children begging for bread.  
26 All day long he is gracious and lends, and his offspring are a blessing.  
27 Turn away from evil and do good, and dwell forever.  
28 For the Lord loves justice and will not forsake His godly ones; they are preserved forever, but the offspring of the wicked will be cut off.  
29 The righteous will inherit the land and dwell in it forever.  


30 The mouth of the righteous man utters wisdom, and his tongue speaks justice.  
31 The law of his God is in his heart; his steps do not slip.  
32 The wicked man watches the righteous and seeks to kill him.  
33 The Lord will not abandon him to his hand or let him be condemned when he is judged.  


34 Wait for the Lord and keep His way, and He will exalt you to inherit the land; when the wicked are cut off, you will see it.  
35 I have seen a wicked, ruthless man flourishing like a luxuriant native tree.  
36 But he passed away, and behold, he was no more; though I sought him, he could not be found.  


37 Observe the blameless man and consider the upright, for the man of peace has a future.  
38 But transgressors will be destroyed together; the future of the wicked will be cut off.  
39 The salvation of the righteous is from the Lord; He is their stronghold in the time of trouble.  
40 The Lord helps them and delivers them; He delivers them from the wicked and saves them, because they take refuge in Him.




Chapter 38


1 O Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger, nor discipline me in your wrath.  
2 For your arrows have pierced me, and your hand has come down upon me.  
3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of your indignation; there is no health in my bones because of my sin.  
4 For my iniquities have gone over my head; like a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me.  
5 My wounds stink and fester because of my foolishness.  
6 I am bent over and greatly bowed down; I go about mourning all day long.  
7 For my loins are filled with burning, and there is no soundness in my flesh.  
8 I am feeble and utterly crushed; I groan because of the turmoil of my heart.  


9 Lord, all my longing is before you, and my sighing is not hidden from you.  
10 My heart throbs, my strength fails me, and the light of my eyes—it also has gone from me.  
11 My friends and companions stand aloof from my plague, and my kinsmen stand far off.  
12 Those who seek my life lay snares for me; those who seek my hurt speak of ruin and meditate treachery all day long.  


13 But I am like a deaf man; I do not hear, like a mute man who does not open his mouth.  
14 I have become like a man who does not hear, and in whose mouth are no rebukes.  
15 For I hope in you, O Lord; you will answer, O Lord my God.  
16 For I said, “Lest they rejoice over me; when my foot slips, they magnify themselves against me.”  
17 For I am ready to fall, and my pain is always before me.  
18 I confess my iniquity; I am sorry for my sin.  


19 But my enemies are vigorous; they are strong, and those who hate me wrongfully are multiplied.  
20 Those who render me evil for good accuse me because I follow after good.  
21 Do not forsake me, O Lord; O my God, be not far from me.  
22 Hasten to help me, O Lord, my salvation.




Chapter 39


1 I said, "I will guard my ways,  
    that I may not sin with my tongue;  
    I will put a muzzle on my mouth  
    while the wicked are in my presence."  


2 I was silent and held my peace,  
    even from good,  
    but my distress grew worse.  


3 My heart grew hot within me;  
    as I meditated, the fire burned.  
    Then I spoke with my tongue:  


4 "O Lord, make me know my end  
    and the measure of my days, what it is;  
    let me know how fleeting I am.  


5 Behold, You have made my days a few handbreadths,  
    and my lifetime is as nothing before You.  
    Surely every man stands as a mere breath.  


6 Surely man goes about as a shadow!  
    Surely they busy themselves in vain;  
    he heaps up wealth, not knowing who will gather it.  


7 And now, O Lord, for what do I wait?  
    My hope is in You.  


8 Deliver me from all my transgressions;  
    do not make me the scorn of the fool.  


9 I am silent; I do not open my mouth,  
    for You have done it.  


10 Remove Your stroke from me;  
    I am worn down by the blow of Your hand.  


11 When You discipline a man with rebukes for sin,  
    You consume like a moth what is dear to him;  
    surely every man is but a breath.  


12 Hear my prayer, O Lord,  
    and give ear to my cry;  
    do not be silent at my tears.  
    For I am a sojourner with You,  
    a foreigner, as all my fathers were.  


13 Look away from me, that I may regain strength  
    before I depart and am no more.”




Psalm 40


1 I waited patiently for the Lord, and He turned to me and heard my cry.
2 He lifted me out of the pit of destruction, out of the muddy clay,
    and set my feet on a rock, making my steps secure.
3 He put a new song in my mouth, a hymn of praise to our God.
    Many will see and fear and put their trust in the Lord.


4 Blessed is the man who makes the Lord his trust,
    who does not turn to the proud or to those who follow lies.
5 Lord my God, You have done many wondrous things—
    Your plans for us are beyond compare.
    If I were to speak and declare them all, they would be too numerous to count.


6 You take no delight in sacrifice and offering; You have opened my ears.
    Burnt offerings and sin offerings You have not required.


7 Then I said, “Here I am; in the scroll of the book it is written about me.
8 I delight to do Your will, my God; Your law is within my heart.”


9 I have proclaimed righteousness in the great assembly;
    indeed, I do not restrain my lips—You, Lord, know this.
10 I have not hidden Your righteousness in my heart;
    Rather, I have spoken openly of Your faithfulness and salvation.
    I have not concealed Your lovingkindness and truth from the great assembly.


11 Lord, do not withhold Your mercy from me;
    may Your lovingkindness and truth always guard me.
12 For troubles without number have surrounded me;
    my iniquities have overtaken me—I cannot see.
    They are more than the hairs of my head, and my courage has abandoned me.


13 Lord, be pleased to rescue me; hurry to help me, O Lord.
14 Let those who seek to destroy my life be ashamed and humiliated together;
    let those who take delight in my harm be turned back in disgrace.
15 Let those who say to me, “Aha! Aha!” be appalled because of their shame.


16 But may all who seek You rejoice and be glad in You;
    may those who love Your salvation always say, “The Lord is great!”
17 As for me, I am poor and needy, but the Lord thinks of me.
    You are my help and my deliverer—my God, do not delay.




Chapter 41


1 Blessed is the man who considers the poor;
  the LORD will deliver him in the day of trouble.
2 The LORD will protect him and keep him alive;
  he will be called blessed in the land.
  You will not hand him over to the desire of his enemies.  


3 The LORD will sustain him on his sickbed;
  in his illness, You restore him to full health.  
4 As for me, I said, “O LORD, be gracious to me;
  heal my soul, for I have sinned against You.”  


5 My enemies speak evil of me: “When will he die and his name perish?”  
6 And if one comes to see me, he speaks lies;
  his heart gathers iniquity for itself. When he goes out, he tells it abroad.  
7 All who hate me whisper together against me;
  they imagine the worst for me.  


8 They say, “A wicked thing is poured out upon him;
  now that he lies down, he will not rise again.”  
9 Even my close friend, in whom I trusted,
  who ate my bread, has lifted up his heel against me.  
10 But You, O LORD, be gracious to me and raise me up, that I may repay them.  


11 By this I know that You delight in me:
  my enemy does not triumph over me.  
12 As for me, You uphold me in my integrity
  and set me in Your presence forever.  
13 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
  from everlasting to everlasting. Amen and Amen.




Chapter 42


1 As the deer pants for streams of water,
so my soul pants for You, O God.
2 My soul thirsts for God, for the living God.
When shall I come and appear before God?


3 My tears have been my food day and night,
while they continually say to me, “Where is your God?”
4 These things I remember as I pour out my soul within me:
how I would go with the multitude,
leading them in procession to the house of God,
with a voice of joy and thanksgiving, a crowd keeping festival.


5 Why are you cast down, O my soul?
And why are you in turmoil within me?
Hope in God, for I shall yet praise Him,
the salvation of my countenance and my God.


6 My soul is cast down within me;
therefore I remember You from the land of the Jordan
and the heights of Hermon, from Mount Mizar.
7 Deep calls to deep at the roar of Your waterfalls;
all Your breakers and Your waves have gone over me.


8 By day the Lord commands His lovingkindness,
and at night His song is with me— a prayer to the God of my life.
9 I say to God, my rock, “Why have You forgotten me?
Why must I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?”
10 As with a deadly wound in my bones, my adversaries taunt me,
while they say to me all day long, “Where is your God?”


11 Why are you cast down, O my soul?
And why are you in turmoil within me?
Hope in God, for I shall yet praise Him,
the salvation of my countenance and my God.




Chapter 43


1 Vindicate me, O God, and plead my case against an ungodly nation;
    deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man.  
2 For You are the God of my refuge—why have You rejected me?
    Why do I go about in mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?


3 Send out Your light and Your truth—let them guide me;
    let them bring me to Your holy mountain and to Your dwelling places.  
4 Then I will go to the altar of God, to God, my exceeding joy,
    and I will praise You with the lyre, O God, my God.


5 Why are you cast down, O my soul, and why are you in turmoil within me?
    Hope in God, for I shall again praise Him, my salvation and my God.




Chapter 44


1 O God, with our ears we have heard—our fathers have told us—
    the work that you did in their days, in the days of old.  
2 You, with your own hand, drove out the nations, but them you planted;
    you afflicted the peoples, but them you set free.  
3 For it was not by their sword that they took possession of the land,
    nor did their arm save them, but your right hand, your arm, and the light of your face—
    for you delighted in them.


4 You are my King, O God;
    command salvation for Jacob.  
5 Through you we push back our foes;
    through your name we trample down those who rise against us.  
6 For not in my bow do I trust, and my sword does not save me.  
7 But you have saved us from our foes and have put to shame those who hate us.  
8 In God we have boasted all day long,
    and we will give thanks to your name forever.


9 Yet you have rejected us and disgraced us, and you do not go out with our armies.  
10 You make us turn back from the foe, and those who hate us have taken spoil for themselves.  
11 You make us like sheep for slaughter and have scattered us among the nations.  
12 You sell your people for nothing and have gained no profit from their sale.  
13 You make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing and derision to those around us.  
14 You make us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples.  
15 All day long my disgrace is before me, and the shame of my face covers me  
16 because of the voice of the one who taunts and reviles, because of the enemy and the avenger.


17 All this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten you,
    nor have we been false to your covenant.  
18 Our heart has not turned back,
    nor have our steps departed from your way,  
19 though you have crushed us in the place of jackals
    and covered us with deep darkness.


20 If we had forgotten the name of our God
    or spread out our hands to a foreign god,  
21 would not God discover this?
    For he knows the secrets of the heart.  
22 Yet for your sake we are killed all day long;
    we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered.


23 Awake! Why do you sleep, O Lord?
    Arise! Do not reject us forever.  
24 Why do you hide your face?
    Why do you forget our affliction and oppression?  
25 For our soul is bowed down to the dust;
    our belly clings to the ground.  
26 Rise up; come to our help.
    Redeem us for the sake of your steadfast love.




Chapter 45


1 My heart overflows with a good theme;
    I address my verses to the king;
    my tongue is the pen of a skillful scribe.
2 You are fairer than the sons of men;
    grace is poured upon your lips;
    therefore God has blessed you forever.
3 Gird your sword on your thigh, O mighty one, in your splendor and your majesty!


4 And in your majesty ride forth victoriously for the cause of truth and humility and righteousness;
    let your right hand teach you awesome deeds.


5 Your arrows are sharp—nations fall under you—the arrows are in the heart of the king’s enemies.
6 Your throne, O God, is forever and ever; a scepter of uprightness is the scepter of your kingdom.
7 You have loved righteousness and hated wickedness; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of joy above your companions.
8 All your garments are fragrant with myrrh and aloes and cassia;
    from ivory palaces stringed instruments make you glad.


9 Daughters of kings are among your noble women;
    at your right hand stands the queen in gold from Ophir.


10 Listen, O daughter, and see, and incline your ear:
    forget your people and your father’s house,


11 and the king will desire your beauty.
    Bow to him, for he is your lord.


12 And the daughter of Tyre will come with a gift;
    the wealthy of the people will seek your favor.


13 The king’s daughter is all glorious within;
    her clothing is interwoven with gold.


14 In embroidered garments she is led to the king;
    the virgins, her companions who follow her, are brought to you.


15 They are led with joy and gladness;
    they enter into the palace of the king.


16 In place of your fathers will be your sons;
    you shall make them princes in all the earth.


17 I will cause your name to be remembered in all generations;
    therefore the nations will praise you forever and ever.




Chapter 46
1 God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
2 Therefore we will not fear, though the earth gives way, though the mountains be moved into the heart of the sea;
3 though its waters roar and foam, though the mountains tremble at its swelling. Selah
4 There is a river whose streams make glad the city of God, the holy dwelling place of the Most High.
5 God is in the midst of her; she shall not be shaken; God will help her at the break of dawn.
6 The nations rage, kingdoms totter; He raises His voice, the earth melts.
7 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our fortress. Selah
8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, how He has brought desolations on the earth.
9 He makes wars cease to the end of the earth; He breaks the bow and shatters the spear; He burns the chariots with fire.
10 “Be still, and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted on the earth.”
11 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our fortress. Selah


Chapter 47


1 Clap your hands, all you nations;
shout to God with a ringing voice of joy.
2 For the LORD Most High is to be feared,
a great King over all the earth.


3 He subdues nations under us
and peoples beneath our feet.
4 He chooses our inheritance for us,
the pride of Jacob, whom He loves. Selah


5 God has gone up with a shout,
the LORD with the sound of a trumpet.
6 Sing praises to God, sing praises;
sing praises to our King, sing praises.


7 For God is the King of all the earth;
sing a psalm of understanding.
8 God reigns over the nations;
God sits on His holy throne.


9 The nobles of the peoples gather
as the people of the God of Abraham;
for the shields of the earth belong to God—
He is greatly exalted.




Chapter 48


1 Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in His holy mountain.
2 Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, Mount Zion on the far north, the city of the great King.


3 God is in her citadels; He is known as her refuge.
4 For behold, the kings assembled, they passed by together.


5 They saw it, then they were astounded; they were dismayed and fled in panic.
6 Trembling seized them there, anguish like that of a woman in labor.


7 With the east wind You shattered the ships of Tarshish.
8 Just as we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of our God: God will establish her forever. Selah.


9 We have meditated on Your loyal love, O God, in the midst of Your temple.
10 As is Your name, O God, so is Your praise to the ends of the earth; Your right hand is full of righteousness.


11 Let Mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of Judah exult because of Your judgments.
12 Walk around Zion, go all around her; count her towers.


13 Consider her ramparts, examine her citadels, so that you may tell the next generation,
14 that this is God, our God forever and ever; He will guide us beyond death.




Chapter 49


1 Hear this, all nations;
give ear, all inhabitants of the world,  
2 both low and high, rich and poor together.  
3 My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be understanding.  
4 I will incline my ear to a proverb;
I will solve my riddle to the music of the lyre.


5 Why should I fear in days of evil, when the iniquity of my foes surrounds me,  
6 those who trust in their wealth and boast in the abundance of their riches?  
7 A brother can by no means redeem;
a man cannot give to God a ransom for him—  
8 for the redemption of their soul is costly, and he must abandon the attempt forever—  
9 so that he should live on forever and not see the pit.


10 For he sees that wise men die; likewise the fool and the senseless perish, and leave their wealth to others.  
11 Their graves are their houses forever, their dwelling places from generation to generation, though they had named lands after themselves.  
12 But man, though in honor, does not endure; he is like the beasts that perish.


13 This is the path of those who are foolish, and of those after them who approve of their sayings. Selah.  
14 Like sheep they are appointed for the grave; death shall be their shepherd, and the upright shall rule over them in the morning. Their form shall waste away in the grave, far from their lofty abode.


15 But God will redeem my soul from the hand of the grave, for He will receive me. Selah.


16 Do not be afraid when a man becomes rich, when the glory of his house increases.  
17 For when he dies he will carry nothing away; his glory will not descend after him.  
18 Though he blesses himself during his life— and though men praise you when you prosper—  
19 he shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see the light.


20 A man who is honored yet does not understand is like the beasts that perish.




Chapter 50


1 The Mighty One, God, the LORD, has spoken and summoned the earth from the rising of the sun to its setting.  
2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God has shone forth.  
3 Our God comes and does not keep silence; a fire devours before Him, and around Him a mighty tempest rages.  
4 He calls to the heavens above and to the earth, that He may judge His people:  
5 "Gather to Me My faithful ones, those who have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice."  
6 And the heavens declare His righteousness, for God Himself is judge. Selah.


7 "Hear, O My people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify against you: I am God, your God.  
8 Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you; your burnt offerings are continually before Me.  
9 I will not take a bull from your house, nor goats from your folds.  
10 For every beast of the forest is Mine, the cattle on a thousand hills.  
11 I know all the birds of the mountains, and everything that moves in the field is Mine.  
12 If I were hungry, I would not tell you, for the world and its fullness are Mine.  
13 Do I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?


14 Offer to God a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and fulfill your vows to the Most High.  
15 And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I will deliver you, and you shall glorify Me."


16 But to the wicked God says: "What right have you to recite My statutes or to take My covenant on your lips?  
17 For you hate discipline, and you cast My words behind you.  
18 When you see a thief, you are pleased with him, and you keep company with adulterers.  
19 You give your mouth free rein for evil, and your tongue frames deceit.  
20 You sit and speak against your brother; you slander your own mother's son.  
21 These things you have done, and I kept silent; you thought that I was one like yourself. But now I rebuke you and lay the charge before your eyes.


22 Mark this, then, you who forget God, lest I tear you apart, and there be none to deliver.  
23 He who offers a sacrifice of thanksgiving honors Me; and to him who orders his way rightly I will show the salvation of God."




Chapter 51


1 Have mercy on me, O God, according to Your steadfast love; according to the greatness of Your compassion, blot out my transgressions.  
2 Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.  
3 For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.  
4 Against You, and You alone, I have sinned, and have done what is evil in Your sight, so that You are justified when You speak, and blameless when You judge.


5 Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me.  
6 Behold, You desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden place You make me know wisdom.


7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.  
8 Let me hear joy and gladness; let my bones, which You have crushed, rejoice.  
9 Hide Your face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities.


10 Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a steadfast spirit within me.  
11 Do not cast me away from Your presence, and do not take Your Holy Spirit from me.  
12 Restore to me the joy of Your salvation, and sustain me with a willing spirit.


13 Then I will teach transgressors Your ways, and sinners shall return to You.


14 Deliver me from bloodguilt, O God, God of my salvation, and my tongue will sing aloud of Your righteousness.  
15 O Lord, open my lips, and my mouth will declare Your praise.


16 For You do not desire sacrifice, or I would give it; You do not take pleasure in burnt offerings.  
17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God, You will not despise.


18 Do good to Zion in Your good pleasure; build the walls of Jerusalem.  
19 Then You will delight in righteous sacrifices, in burnt offering and whole burnt offering; then bulls will be offered on Your altar.




Chapter 52


1 Why do you boast of evil, O mighty man?  
The steadfast love of God endures all day long.  
2 Your tongue devises destruction,  
like a sharpened razor, working deceit.
3 You love evil more than good,  
lying more than speaking righteousness. Selah  


4 You love all devouring words,  
O deceitful tongue.
5 God will break you down forever;  
He will snatch you and tear you from your tent;  
He will uproot you from the land of the living. Selah  


6 The righteous shall see and fear,  
and shall laugh at him, saying,
7 “Behold the man who did not make God his refuge,  
but trusted in the abundance of his riches,  
and grew strong through his wickedness.”
8 But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God;  
I trust in the steadfast love of God forever and ever.
9 I will give thanks to You forever for what You have done;  
I will wait on Your name, for it is good,  
in the presence of Your faithful ones. 




Chapter 53


1 The fool says in his heart, “There is no God.”  
They are corrupt, and they have committed abominable injustice;  
there is none who does good.
2 God looks down from heaven upon the sons of man  
to see if there is one who understands, who seeks God.
3 All of them have turned aside; together they have become corrupt;  
there is none who does good, not even one.


4 Do they not understand—those who work iniquity,  
who devour My people as they eat bread,  
and do not call upon God?


5 There they were in great terror, where there was no terror,  
for God scattered the bones of those who encamped against you;  
you put them to shame, for God rejected them.


6 Oh that salvation for Israel would come out of Zion!  
When God restores the fortunes of His people,  
Jacob will rejoice, Israel will be glad.  




Chapter 54


For the choirmaster: with stringed instruments. A Maskil of David, when the Ziphites came and said to Saul, “Is not David hiding among us?”


1 O God, save me by Your name,
and by Your might vindicate me.
2 O God, hear my prayer;
give ear to the words of my mouth.


3 For strangers have risen against me,
and ruthless men seek my life;
they have not set God before them.


4 Behold, God is my helper;
the Lord is the upholder of my soul.
5 He will repay the evil to my foes;
in Your faithfulness, put an end to them.


6 With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to You;
I will give thanks to Your name, O LORD, for it is good.
7 For from every distress He has delivered me,
and my eye has looked in triumph upon my enemies.




Chapter 55


1 Give ear to my prayer, O God,
and do not hide Yourself from my supplication.
2 Attend to me and answer me;
I am restless in my complaint and I moan,
3 because of the voice of the enemy,
because of the oppression of the wicked.
For they cast iniquity upon me,
and in anger they bear a grudge against me.


4 My heart writhes within me,
and the terrors of death have fallen upon me.
5 Fear and trembling come upon me,
and horror has overwhelmed me.
6 And I say, “Oh, that I had wings like a dove!
I would fly away and be at rest.
7 Behold, I would flee far away;
I would lodge in the wilderness. Selah

8 I would hasten my escape
from the stormy wind and tempest.”
9 Confuse, O Lord, divide their tongues,
for I see violence and strife in the city.
10 Day and night they go around it on its walls,
and iniquity and trouble are within it;
11 destruction is within it;
oppression and deceit do not depart from its public square.


12 For it is not an enemy who reproaches me—then I could bear it;
it is not one who hates me who exalts himself against me—then I could hide from him.
13 But it is you, a man my equal,
my companion and my familiar friend.
14 We used to take sweet counsel together;
within the house of God we walked in the throng.


15 Let death come upon them;
let them go down alive into the grave,
for evil is in their dwelling, in their midst.


16 But I, I call to God,
and the LORD will save me.
17 Evening and morning and at noon I complain and moan,
and He hears my voice.
18 He redeems my soul in peace from the battle against me,
for many are against me.
19 God will hear and humble them,
He who is enthroned from of old. Selah

Because they do not change
and do not fear God.
20 My companion has stretched out his hand against those at peace with him;
he has violated his covenant.
21 His speech was smoother than butter,
but war was in his heart;
his words were softer than oil,
yet they were drawn swords.


22 Cast your burden on the LORD, and He will sustain you;
He will never allow the righteous to be shaken.
23 But You, O God, will bring them down to the pit of destruction;
men of blood and deceit shall not live out half their days.
But as for me, I will trust in You.




Chapter 56


1 Be gracious to me, O God, for man tramples me;
all day long an attacker oppresses me.
2 My foes trample upon me all day long,
for many are attacking me proudly.
3 When I am afraid, I will trust in you.


4 In God, whose word I praise—in God I trust;
I will not be afraid. What can flesh do to me?


5 All day long they twist my words;
all their thoughts are against me for evil.
6 They stir up strife, they lurk,
they watch my steps, as they have waited for my life.
7 Shall they escape in spite of their wrongdoing?
In anger, O God, bring down the nations.


8 You have kept count of my wanderings;
put my tears in your bottle—are they not in your book?
9 Then my enemies will turn back on the day I call;
this I know, that God is for me.


10 In God, whose word I praise,
in the Lord, whose word I praise,
11 in God I trust; I will not be afraid.
What can man do to me?


12 My vows to you, O God, are binding upon me;
I will render thank offerings to you.
13 For you have delivered my soul from death,
yes, my feet from stumbling,
that I may walk before God in the light of life.




Chapter 57


1 Be gracious to me, O God, be gracious to me,
for in you my soul takes refuge;
in the shadow of your wings I will take refuge,
until destruction passes by.
2 I cry out to God Most High,
to God who accomplishes all things for me.
3 He will send from heaven and save me;
he will reproach him who tramples upon me. Selah.
God will send forth his mercy and his truth.
4 My soul is in the midst of lions;
I lie down among those who devour with fire—
sons of man whose teeth are spears and arrows,
whose tongue is a sharp sword.
5 Be exalted above the heavens, O God;
let your glory be above all the earth.
6 They set a net for my steps;
my soul was bowed down.
They dug a pit before me;
yet they fell into it themselves. Selah.
7 My heart is steadfast, O God, my heart is steadfast;
I will sing and make melody.
8 Awake, my glory!
Awake, harp and lyre!
I will awaken the dawn.
9 I will give thanks to you among the nations, O Lord;
I will sing praises to you among the peoples.
10 For your mercy is great unto the heavens,
and your truth unto the clouds.
11 Be exalted above the heavens, O God;
let your glory be above all the earth.




Chapter 58


1 Do you indeed speak righteousness, O mighty ones?
Do you judge uprightly, O sons of man?
2 No, in your heart you work unrighteousness;
with your hands you deal out violence on the earth.


3 The wicked are estranged from the womb;
they go astray from birth, speaking lies.
4 Their venom is like the venom of a serpent,
like a deaf viper that stops its ear,
5 so that it does not hear the voice of charmers,
or of a cunning enchanter.


6 O God, break the teeth in their mouths;
tear out the fangs of the young lions, O LORD.
7 Let them vanish like water that flows away;
when he aims his arrows, let them be as though cut off.
8 Let them be like a snail that melts away as it moves,
like the stillborn child of a woman who never sees the sun.


9 Before your pots can feel the heat of thorns,
whether green or burning, he will sweep them away.


10 The righteous will rejoice when he sees the vengeance;
he will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.
11 And man will say, “Surely there is a reward for the righteous;
surely there is a God who judges on the earth.”




Chapter 59


1 Deliver me from my enemies, O my God;
set me on high from those who rise up against me.
2 Deliver me from those who work evil, and save me from men of blood.


3 For behold, they lie in wait for my life;
fierce men stir up strife against me,
not for my transgression nor for my sin, O LORD.
4 Without guilt of mine, they run and prepare themselves;
awake to meet me, and see!


5 You, O LORD God of hosts, God of Israel,
rouse yourself to punish all the nations;
show no mercy to any treacherous evildoers. Selah.


6 They return at evening, they howl like dogs,
and go around the city.
7 Behold, they belch with their mouths;
swords are in their lips—“For who hears?” they say.


8 But you, O LORD, will laugh at them;
you will hold all the nations in derision.
9 O my Strength, I will watch for you,
for God is my high fortress.


10 My God in his steadfast love will meet me;
God will let me look in triumph on my enemies.


11 Do not kill them, lest my people forget;
make them wander by your power, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield.
12 For the sin of their mouth, the word of their lips,
let them be trapped in their pride;
and for cursing and lies that they utter,
13 consume them in wrath, consume them till they are no more,
that they may know that God rules in Jacob to the ends of the earth. Selah.


14 They return at evening, they howl like dogs, and go around the city.
15 They wander about for food, and growl if they are not satisfied.


16 But I will sing of your strength;
in the morning I will sing aloud of your mercy.
For you have been a fortress for me and a refuge in the day of my distress.
17 O my Strength, I will sing praises to you,
for God is my high fortress,
the God who shows me steadfast love.




Chapter 60


1 O God, you have rejected us, broken us; you have been angry—restore us.
2 You have made the land tremble; you have torn it open. Heal its fractures, for it is tottering.
3 You have shown your people hard things; you have given us wine to stagger us.


4 You have set up a banner for those who fear you, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
5 That your beloved ones may be delivered, save with your right hand and answer us.


6 God has spoken in his holiness: “I will exult; I will divide Shechem and measure out the Valley of Succoth.
7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the helmet of my head; Judah is my scepter.
8 Moab is my washbasin; upon Edom I cast my sandal; over Philistia I shout in triumph.”


9 Who will bring me to the fortified city? Who will lead me to Edom?
10 Have you not rejected us, O God? You do not go out, O God, with our armies.
11 Give us help against the foe, for the help of man is worthless.
12 Through God we shall do valiantly, and he will tread down our foes.




Chapter 61


1 Hear my cry, O God;
attend to my prayer.
2 From the end of the earth
I call to you when my heart is faint;
lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
3 For you have been a refuge for me,
a strong tower against the enemy.


4 Let me dwell in your tent forever;
let me take refuge in the shelter of your wings.
5 For you, O God, have heard my vows;
you have given me the heritage of those who fear your name.


6 You will add days to the king’s life;
his years will be as many generations.
7 He will abide before God forever;
appoint steadfast love and faithfulness to guard him.


8 So I will sing praise to your name forever,
that I may fulfill my vows day after day.




Chapter 62


1 My soul waits in silence for God alone;
from him comes my salvation.
2 He alone is my rock and my salvation, my fortress—
I shall not be greatly shaken.


3 How long will you assail a man, all of you,
to break him down, like a leaning wall, a tottering fence?
4 Surely they plan to cast him down from his high place;
they take pleasure in falsehood.
They bless with their mouths,
but inwardly they curse.


5 My soul, wait in silence for God alone,
for my hope is from him.
6 He alone is my rock and my salvation,
my fortress—I shall not be shaken.
7 On God rests my salvation and my glory;
the rock of my strength, my refuge is in God.


8 Trust in him at all times, O men;
pour out your heart before him;
God is a refuge for us.


9 Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of rank are a lie;
in the balances they go up—they are altogether lighter than a breath.
10 Do not trust in oppression, and do not set vain hopes in robbery;
if riches increase, do not set your heart upon them.


11 God has spoken once, twice I have heard this:
that power belongs to God,
12 and to you, O Lord, belongs steadfast love.
For you repay each man according to his work.




Chapter 63


1 O God, you are my God—earnestly I seek you;
my soul thirsts for you, my flesh faints for you,
in a dry and weary land without water.
2 So I have looked upon you in the sanctuary,
beholding your power and your glory.
3 Because your steadfast love is better than life,
my lips will praise you.
4 So I will bless you as long as I live;
in your name I will lift up my hands.


5 My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
and my mouth will praise you with joyful lips,
6 when I remember you on my bed
and meditate on you in the night watches.
7 For you have been my help,
and in the shadow of your wings I will sing for joy.
8 My soul clings to you;
your right hand upholds me.


9 But those who seek to destroy my life
will go down into the depths of the earth;
10 they shall be given over to the sword;
they shall be a portion for jackals.
11 But the king will rejoice in God;
everyone who swears by him will exult,
for the mouth of liars will be stopped.




Chapter 64


1 Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint;
preserve my life from the terror of the enemy.
2 Hide me from the secret plots of the wicked,
from the throng of evildoers,
3 who sharpen their tongue like a sword,
who aim bitter words like arrows,
4 to shoot from ambush at the innocent;
they shoot suddenly, without fear.


5 They hold fast to their evil purpose;
they talk of laying hidden snares;
they say, “Who will see them?”
6 They plot injustice, saying, “We have devised a perfect plan!”
For the inward mind and heart of man are deep.


7 But God will shoot them with an arrow;
suddenly they will be struck down.
8 Their own tongue will bring them ruin;
all who see them will shake their heads.
9 Then all men will fear;
they will declare the work of God
and consider what he has done.
10 The righteous will rejoice in the LORD and take refuge in him,
and all the upright in heart will glory.




Chapter 65


1 Praise waits for you, O God, in Zion,
and to you shall the vow be fulfilled.
2 O you who hear prayer,
to you all flesh will come.
3 Iniquities prevail against me—
our transgressions, you will atone for them.
4 Blessed is the man you choose and bring near, to dwell in your courts.
We shall be satisfied with the goodness of your house, the holiness of your temple.


5 By awesome deeds in righteousness you answer us,
O God of our salvation,
the confidence of all the ends of the earth
and of the farthest sea,
6 who establishes the mountains by his strength,
being girded with might,
7 who stills the roaring of the seas,
the roaring of their waves, and the tumult of the nations.
8 Those who dwell at the ends of the earth stand in awe of your signs;
you make the going out of the morning and the evening to shout for joy.


9 You visit the earth and water it, you greatly enrich it;
the river of God is full of water; you provide their grain, for so you have prepared it.
10 You water its furrows abundantly, settling its ridges,
softening it with showers, blessing its growth.
11 You crown the year with your goodness,
and your paths drip with abundance.
12 The pastures of the wilderness drip,
and the hills gird themselves with joy.
13 The meadows are clothed with flocks, and the valleys are covered with grain;
they shout and sing together for joy.




Chapter 66


1 Shout joyfully to God, all the earth.
2 Sing the glory of His name;
make His praise glorious.
3 Say to God, “How awesome are Your works!
Because of the greatness of Your power,
Your enemies come bowing before You.
4 All the earth will worship You and sing praises to You;
they will sing praises to Your name.”


5 Come and see the works of God;
He is awesome in His deeds toward the sons of man.
6 He turned the sea into dry land;
they passed through the river on foot;
Let us rejoice in Him there.
7 He rules by His own power forever;
His eyes keep watch on the nations;
let not the rebellious exalt themselves.


8 Bless our God, O peoples,
and sound aloud the voice of His praise,
9 who keeps our soul in life
and does not allow our foot to slip.
10 For You have tested us, O God;
You have refined us as silver is refined.
11 You brought us into the net;
You laid a burden upon our loins.
12 You made men ride over our heads;
we went through fire and through water,
but You brought us out to a place of abundance.


13 I shall come into Your house with burnt offerings;
I shall pay You my vows,
14 which my lips uttered
and my mouth spoke when I was in distress.
15 I shall offer to You burnt offerings of fatlings,
with the smoke of rams;
I shall offer bulls with male goats.


16 Come and hear, all who fear God,
and I will declare what He has done for my soul.
17 I cried to Him with my mouth,
and He was glorified by my tongue.
18 If I had regarded iniquity in my heart,
the Lord would not have heard.
19 But surely God has heard;
He has given heed to the voice of my prayer.
20 Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayer
nor His lovingkindness from me.




Chapter 67


1 May God be gracious to us and bless us,
and cause His face to shine upon us,
2 that Your way may be known on the earth,
Your salvation among all nations.


3 Let the peoples praise You, O God;
let all the peoples praise You.
4 Let the nations be glad and sing for joy,
for You will judge the peoples with uprightness
and guide the nations on the earth.


5 Let the peoples praise You, O God;
let all the peoples praise You.


6 The earth has yielded its produce;
God, our God, will bless us.
7 God will bless us,
and all the ends of the earth will fear Him.




Chapter 68


1 Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered;
and let those who hate Him flee before Him.
2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away;
as wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish before God.
3 But the righteous shall be glad;
they shall rejoice before God and exult with joy.


4 Sing to God, sing praises to His name;
lift up a song to Him who rides through the deserts—
His name is the LORD—exult before Him.
5 A father to the fatherless and a judge for the widows
is God in His holy habitation.
6 God sets the solitary in families;
He brings out those who are bound with chains,
but the rebellious dwell in a parched land.


7 O God, when You went out before Your people,
when You marched through the wilderness—Selah
8 The earth trembled, the heavens also dropped rain at the presence of God;
Sinai itself quaked at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
9 You caused abundant rain to fall, O God;
You confirmed Your inheritance when it was weary.
10 Your congregation dwelled in it;
You, O God, prepared it in Your goodness for the poor.


11 The Lord gives the command;
great is the company of those who proclaim it.
12 Kings of armies flee—they flee!
And she who remains at home divides the spoil.
13 Though you lie among the sheepfolds,
the wings of a dove are covered with silver,
and its pinions with shimmering gold.
14 When the Almighty scattered kings there, it snowed on Zalmon.


15 A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan;
a mountain of many peaks is the mountain of Bashan.
16 Why do you look with envy, O mountains of many peaks,
at the mountain which God has desired for His dwelling?
Yes, the LORD will dwell there forever.
17 The chariots of God are twice ten thousand, thousands upon thousands;
the Lord is among them at Sinai in holiness.
18 You have ascended on high, You have led captive captives;
You have received gifts among men, even among the rebellious,
that the LORD God might dwell there.


19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily bears us up;
God is our salvation. Selah
20 Our God is a God of deliverances,
and to the LORD, the Lord, belongs escape from death.
21 But God will shatter the heads of His enemies,
the hairy scalp of him who walks in guilt.


22 The Lord said, “I will bring them back from Bashan,
I will bring them back from the depths of the sea,
23 that your foot may shatter them in blood,
the tongue of your dogs may have its share from the enemies.”


24 They have seen Your processions, O God,
the processions of my God, my King, into the sanctuary.
25 The singers went before, the musicians followed after,
in the midst were maidens playing tambourines.
26 Bless God in the congregations, the LORD,
O you who are from the fountain of Israel.
27 There is Benjamin, the youngest, ruling over them,
the princes of Judah in their throng, the princes of Zebulun, the princes of Naphtali.


28 Your God has commanded your strength;
show Yourself strong, O God, as You have done for us before.
29 Because of Your temple at Jerusalem kings will bring gifts to You.
30 Rebuke the beasts of the reeds, the herd of bulls with the calves of the peoples, trampling underfoot the pieces of silver;
He has scattered the peoples who delight in war.
31 Envoys will come out of Egypt;
Cush will hasten to stretch out her hands to God.


32 Sing to God, O kingdoms of the earth;
sing praises to the Lord—Selah
33 To Him who rides in the heavens, the ancient heavens;
behold, He sends out His voice, a mighty voice.
34 Ascribe strength to God;
His majesty is over Israel, and His strength is in the skies.
35 O God, You are awesome from Your sanctuary;
the God of Israel gives strength and power to the people. Blessed be God!




Chapter 69


1 Save me, O God, for the waters have come up to my neck.
2 I sink in deep mire, where there is no footing;
I have come into deep waters, and the flood sweeps over me.
3 I am weary with my crying; my throat is parched;
my eyes fail while I wait for my God.


4 More numerous than the hairs of my head are those who hate me without cause;
mighty are those who would destroy me, my enemies falsely;
what I did not steal, I must restore.
5 O God, you know my folly,
and my guilt is not hidden from you.


6 Let not those who wait for you be put to shame through me, O Lord GOD of hosts;
let not those who seek you be dishonored through me, O God of Israel.
7 For it is for your sake that I have borne reproach,
that shame has covered my face.
8 I have become a stranger to my brothers,
and an alien to my mother’s sons.
9 For zeal for your house has consumed me,
and the reproaches of those who reproach you have fallen on me.


10 When I wept and humbled my soul with fasting,
it became my reproach.
11 When I made sackcloth my clothing,
I became a byword to them.
12 Those who sit in the gate speak against me,
and I am the song of the drunkards.


13 But as for me, my prayer is to you, O LORD, at an acceptable time;
O God, in the abundance of your steadfast love, answer me in your saving faithfulness.
14 Deliver me from the mire, and do not let me sink;
let me be delivered from those who hate me, and from the deep waters.
15 Do not let the flood sweep over me,
or the deep swallow me up,
or the pit close its mouth over me.


16 Answer me, O LORD, for your steadfast love is good;
according to your abundant mercy, turn to me.
17 Do not hide your face from your servant,
for I am in distress; make haste to answer me.
18 Draw near to my soul and redeem it;
ransom me because of my enemies.


19 You know my reproach, and my shame and my dishonor;
my adversaries are all before you.
20 Reproach has broken my heart, and I am in despair.
I looked for pity, but there was none,
and for comforters, but I found none.
21 They gave me poison for food,
and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.


22 Let their table before them become a snare,
and when they are at peace, let it become a trap.
23 Let their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see,
and make their loins tremble continually.
24 Pour out your indignation upon them,
and let your burning anger overtake them.
25 May their camp be desolate;
let no one dwell in their tents.


26 For they persecute him whom you have struck down,
and they recount the pain of those you have wounded.
27 Add guilt to their guilt,
and let them not come into your righteousness.
28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living;
let them not be enrolled among the righteous.


29 But I am afflicted and in pain;
let your salvation, O God, set me on high.
30 I will praise the name of God with a song;
I will magnify him with thanksgiving.
31 This will please the LORD more than an ox,
or a bull with horns and hoofs.


32 The humble will see and be glad;
you who seek God, let your hearts revive.
33 For the LORD hears the needy
and does not despise his own who are prisoners.


34 Let heaven and earth praise him,
the seas and everything that moves in them.
35 For God will save Zion
and build the cities of Judah,
and they shall dwell there and possess it;
36 the offspring of his servants shall inherit it,
and those who love his name shall dwell in it.




Chapter 70


1 O God, hasten to deliver me;
O LORD, make haste to help me.
2 Let those who seek my life be put to shame and confounded;
let those who desire my harm be turned back and humiliated.
3 Let those who say, “Aha! Aha!” turn back because of their shame.
4 Let all who seek you rejoice and be glad in you;
and let those who love your salvation say continually, “God is great!”
5 But I am afflicted and needy;
O God, hasten to me!
You are my help and my deliverer;
O LORD, do not delay.




Chapter 71


1 In you, O LORD, I have taken refuge;
let me never be put to shame.
2 In your righteousness deliver me and rescue me;
incline your ear to me and save me.
3 Be to me a rock of refuge to which I may continually come;
you have given the command to save me, for you are my rock and my fortress.


4 Rescue me, O my God, from the hand of the wicked,
from the grasp of the unjust and cruel man.
5 For you are my hope, O Lord GOD, my trust from my youth.
6 Upon you I have leaned from before my birth;
you are the one who took me from my mother’s womb.
My praise is continually of you.


7 I have been as a wonder to many,
but you are my strong refuge.
8 My mouth is filled with your praise,
and with your glory all day long.


9 Do not cast me off in the time of old age;
do not forsake me when my strength is spent.
10 For my enemies speak against me,
and those who watch for my life conspire together,
11 saying, “God has forsaken him;
pursue and seize him, for there is none to deliver.”
12 O God, do not be far from me;
O my God, make haste to help me.
13 Let those who are adversaries of my soul be put to shame and consumed;
let those who seek to harm me be covered with scorn and disgrace.


14 But as for me, I will hope continually,
and I will praise you yet more and more.
15 My mouth will recount your righteousness,
your salvation all day long, for I do not know their extent.
16 I will come with the mighty deeds of the Lord GOD;
I will make mention of your righteousness, yours alone.


17 O God, you have taught me from my youth,
and to this day I declare your wondrous deeds.
18 Even when I am old and gray, O God, do not forsake me,
until I declare your strength to the next generation, your might to all who are to come.


19 Your righteousness, O God, reaches to the heavens,
you who have done great things;
O God, who is like you?
20 You who have shown me many troubles and calamities will revive me again;
from the depths of the earth you will bring me up again.
21 You will increase my greatness and comfort me once again.


22 I will also praise you with the harp for your faithfulness, O my God;
I will sing praises to you with the lyre, O Holy One of Israel.
23 My lips will shout for joy when I sing praises to you,
and my soul, which you have redeemed.
24 My tongue also will speak of your righteousness all day long,
for those who seek to harm me are put to shame and disgraced.




Chapter 72


1 Give the king your judgments, O God,
and your righteousness to the son of the king.
2 May he judge your people with righteousness,
and your afflicted with justice.
3 Let the mountains bring peace to the people,
and the hills, righteousness.
4 May he bring justice to the afflicted of the people,
save the children of the needy,
and crush the oppressor.


5 Let them fear you while the sun endures,
and as long as the moon, throughout all generations.
6 May he be like rain that falls on the mown grass,
like showers that water the earth.
7 In his days may the righteous flourish,
and abundance of peace until the moon is no more.


8 May he have dominion from sea to sea,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.
9 Let those who dwell in the desert bow before him,
and his enemies lick the dust.
10 May the kings of Tarshish and of the coastlands render tribute,
the kings of Sheba and Seba bring gifts.
11 Let all kings bow down before him,
all nations serve him.


12 For he delivers the needy when he cries,
the afflicted also, and him who has no helper.
13 He has pity on the poor and needy,
and the souls of the needy he saves.
14 From oppression and violence he redeems their soul,
and precious is their blood in his sight.


15 May he live, and may the gold of Sheba be given to him;
may prayer be made for him continually,
and blessings invoked for him all day long.
16 May there be abundance of grain in the land,
on the tops of the mountains may it wave;
may its fruit be like Lebanon,
and may men flourish from the city like the grass of the earth.


17 May his name endure forever,
may his name continue as long as the sun;
and may men be blessed in him,
all nations call him blessed.


18 Blessed be the LORD God, the God of Israel,
who alone does wondrous things.
19 And blessed be his glorious name forever;
and may the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and Amen.


20 The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.




Chapter 73


1 Truly God is good to Israel,
to those who are pure in heart.
2 But as for me, my feet had almost stumbled;
my steps had nearly slipped.
3 For I was envious of the arrogant,
when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.


4 For they have no pains until death,
and their bodies are fat and sleek.
5 They are not in trouble as other men are;
they are not plagued like the rest of mankind.
6 Therefore pride is their necklace;
violence covers them like a garment.
7 Their eyes bulge with abundance;
the imaginations of their heart overflow.
8 They scoff and speak with malice;
loftily they threaten oppression.
9 They set their mouths against the heavens,
and their tongues strut through the earth.


10 Therefore his people turn back to them,
and waters of fullness are drained by them.
11 And they say, “How does God know?
And is there knowledge in the Most High?”
12 Behold, these are the wicked—
always at ease, they increase in wealth.


13 Surely in vain I have kept my heart pure
and washed my hands in innocence.
14 For all day long I am afflicted
and every morning brings punishment.


15 If I had said, “I will speak thus,”
behold, I would have betrayed the generation of your children.
16 But when I pondered to understand this,
it was trouble in my eyes,
17 until I came into the sanctuary of God;
then I understood their end.


18 Truly you set them in slippery places;
you make them fall to ruin.
19 How suddenly they are brought to desolation,
swept away in terrors!
20 Like a dream when one awakes, O Lord,
when you rouse yourself, you despise their image.


21 When my heart was embittered
and I was pierced in my inward parts,
22 I was brutish and ignorant;
I was like a beast before you.
23 Yet I am continually with you;
you hold my right hand.
24 You guide me with your counsel,
and afterward you will receive me to glory.


25 Whom have I in heaven but you?
And there is nothing on earth I desire besides you.
26 My flesh and my heart may fail,
but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.


27 For behold, those who are far from you will perish;
you destroy everyone who is unfaithful to you.
28 But as for me, the nearness of God is my good;
I have made the Lord GOD my refuge,
that I may tell of all your works.




Chapter 74


1 O God, why have you rejected us forever?
Why does your anger smoke against the sheep of your pasture?
2 Remember your congregation, which you purchased of old,
the tribe of your inheritance, whom you redeemed—Mount Zion, where you have dwelled.
3 Direct your steps to the perpetual ruins;
the enemy has laid waste everything in the sanctuary.


4 Your foes have roared in the midst of your meeting place;
they have set up their signs for signs.
5 It was as if one raised an axe in a forest of trees,
6 and now all its carved work they smash with hatchet and hammers.
7 They have set your sanctuary on fire;
they have profaned the dwelling place of your name, bringing it to the ground.
8 They said in their heart, “Let us completely subdue them!”
They burned all the meeting places of God in the land.


9 We do not see our signs;
there is no longer any prophet,
and none among us knows for how long.
10 How long, O God, is the foe to scoff?
Is the enemy to revile your name forever?
11 Why do you hold back your hand, your right hand?
Draw it from your bosom and destroy them!


12 Yet God is my king of old,
working salvation in the midst of the earth.
13 You divided the sea by your strength;
you broke the heads of the sea monsters on the waters.
14 You crushed the head of Leviathan;
you gave him as food for the creatures of the wilderness.
15 You split open springs and brooks;
you dried up ever-flowing streams.
16 Yours is the day, yours also the night;
you have established the light and the sun.
17 You have set all the boundaries of the earth;
you have made summer and winter.


18 Remember this, O LORD, how the enemy scoffs,
And how a foolish people reviles your name.
19 Do not give the soul of your dove to the wild beast;
do not forget the life of your afflicted forever.
20 Have regard for the covenant,
for the dark places of the land are full of the haunts of violence.
21 Let not the oppressed turn back in shame;
let the afflicted and needy praise your name.


22 Arise, O God, plead your cause;
remember how the foolish man scoffs at you all day long.
23 Do not forget the clamor of your foes,
the uproar of those who rise up against you, which ascends continually.




Chapter 75


1 We give thanks to you, O God, we give thanks,
for your name is near; men recount your wondrous deeds.


2 When I choose the appointed time,
I judge with equity.
3 When the earth and all its inhabitants tremble,
it is I who steady its pillars. Selah


4 I say to the boastful, “Do not boast,”
and to the wicked, “Do not lift up the horn.
5 Do not lift up your horn on high,
do not speak with an arrogant neck.”


6 For lifting people up does not come from the east or from the west,
Neither from the wilderness,
7 but God is the judge:
he brings one down and lifts up another.


8 For in the hand of the LORD there is a cup,
with foaming wine, fully mixed,
and he pours out from it,
and all the wicked of the earth shall drain it down to the dregs.


9 But I will declare it forever;
I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
10 And all the horns of the wicked I will cut off,
but the horns of the righteous shall be lifted up.




Chapter 76


1 God is known in Judah;
his name is great in Israel.
2 His tabernacle is in Salem,
and his dwelling place in Zion.
3 There he broke the flashing arrows,
the shield, the sword, and the weapons of war. Selah


4 Glorious are you, majestic from the mountains of prey.
5 The stouthearted were plundered; they slept their sleep,
and none of the warriors could lift their hands.
6 At your rebuke, O God of Jacob,
both rider and horse lay stunned.


7 You, even you, are to be feared;
who can stand before you once your anger is aroused?
8 From heaven you pronounced judgment;
the earth feared and was still,
9 when God arose to execute judgment,
to save all the humble of the earth. Selah


10 For the wrath of man shall praise you;
with the remainder of wrath you gird yourself.
11 Make vows to the LORD your God and fulfill them;
let all who are around him bring tribute to the one to be feared.
12 He cuts off the spirit of princes;
he is feared by the kings of the earth.




Chapter 77


1 I cry aloud to God—aloud to God, that he may hear me.
2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord;
my hand was stretched out in the night and did not grow weary;
my soul refused to be comforted.


3 I remember God, and I moan;
I meditate, and my spirit grows faint. Selah
4 You hold open my eyelids;
I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
5 I consider the days of old,
the years of long ago.
6 I call to mind my song in the night;
I meditate with my heart,
and my spirit searches diligently:


7 “Will the Lord spurn forever,
and never again show favor?
8 Has his loyal love ceased forever?
Has his promise come to an end for all time?
9 Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has he shut up his compassion in anger?” Selah


10 Then I said, “It is my grief,
that the right hand of the Most High has changed.”


11 I will remember the deeds of the LORD;
yes, I will remember your wonders of old.
12 I will meditate on all your work
and ponder your mighty deeds.
13 Your way, O God, is holy.
What god is great like God?


14 You are the God who works wonders;
you have made known your might among the nations.
15 With your arm you redeemed your people,
the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah


16 The waters saw you, O God;
the waters saw you—and they writhed;
even the depths trembled.
17 The clouds poured out water;
the skies gave forth a sound;
your arrows flashed to and fro.


18 The voice of your thunder was in the whirlwind;
lightnings lit up the world;
the earth trembled and shook.
19 Your way was through the sea,
and your path through the great waters,
yet your footprints were unseen.


20 You led your people like a flock
by the hand of Moses and Aaron.




Chapter 78


1 Give ear, O my people, to my instruction;
incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
2 I will open my mouth with a parable;
I will utter hidden sayings of old,
3 which we have heard and known,
and our fathers have told us.
4 We will not hide them from their children,
telling to the next generation the praises of the LORD,
and his strength and his wondrous deeds that he has done.


5 For he established a testimony in Jacob
and set a law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers to teach their children,
6 so that the next generation might know them—
the children yet to be born—
that they might arise and tell them to their children,
7 that they might put their trust in God
and not forget the works of God,
but keep his commandments;
8 and not be like their fathers,
a stubborn and rebellious generation,
a generation that did not set its heart aright,
and whose spirit was not faithful to God.


9 The sons of Ephraim, armed with the bow,
turned back on the day of battle.
10 They did not keep the covenant of God
and refused to walk in his law.
11 They forgot his deeds
and his wonders that he had shown them.


12 He did marvelous things in the sight of their fathers,
in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
13 He divided the sea and caused them to pass through,
and he made the waters stand like a heap.
14 He led them with a cloud by day
and all the night with a light of fire.
15 He split rocks in the wilderness
and gave them abundant drink as from the deep.
16 He brought streams out of the rock
and caused waters to flow down like rivers.


17 Yet they continued to sin against him,
to rebel against the Most High in the desert.
18 They tested God in their heart
by demanding food to satisfy their cravings.
19 They spoke against God, saying,
“Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?
20 See how he struck the rock so that water gushed out
and streams overflowed.
Can he also give bread
or provide meat for his people?”


21 Therefore the LORD heard and was full of wrath;
a fire was kindled against Jacob,
and anger also rose against Israel,
22 because they did not believe in God
and did not trust in his salvation.
23 Yet he commanded the skies above
and opened the doors of heaven.
24 He rained down manna upon them to eat
and gave them the grain of heaven.
25 Man ate the bread of angels;
he sent them food in abundance.


26 He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens,
and by his power he led out the south wind.
27 He rained meat upon them like dust,
and winged birds like the sand of the seas.
28 He made them fall in the midst of their camp,
all around their dwellings.
29 So they ate and were well filled,
and he gave them what they craved.
30 But before they had satisfied their craving,
while the food was still in their mouths,
31 the anger of God rose against them,
and he killed the strongest of them
and laid low the young men of Israel.


32 In spite of all this they still sinned
and did not believe in his wondrous works.
33 So he made their days vanish like a breath,
and their years in sudden terror.
34 When he killed them, they sought him;
they returned and earnestly sought God.
35 They remembered that God was their rock,
and the Most High God their redeemer.
36 But they flattered him with their mouth,
and lied to him with their tongue.
37 For their heart was not steadfast toward him,
nor were they faithful to his covenant.


38 But he, being compassionate, forgave their iniquity
and did not destroy them.
Often he turned his anger away
and did not stir up all his wrath.
39 He remembered that they were but flesh,
a wind that passes and does not return.


40 How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness
and grieved him in the desert!
41 Again and again they tested God
and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
42 They did not remember his power
or the day when he redeemed them from the foe,
43 when he performed his signs in Egypt
and his wonders in the fields of Zoan.


44 He turned their rivers to blood,
so that they could not drink from their streams.
45 He sent among them swarms of flies, which devoured them,
and frogs, which destroyed them.
46 He gave their crops to the caterpillar
and the fruit of their labor to the locust.
47 He destroyed their vines with hail
and their sycamores with frost.
48 He gave over their livestock to the hail
and their flocks to fiery bolts.


49 He sent upon them his burning anger,
wrath and indignation and distress,
a band of destroying angels.
50 He cleared a path for his anger;
he did not spare them from death
but gave their lives over to the plague.
51 He struck all the firstborn in Egypt,
the first fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham.


52 Then he led out his people like sheep
and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
53 He led them in safety, so that they were not afraid,
but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
54 And he brought them to his holy territory,
to the mountain which his right hand had acquired.
55 He drove out nations before them
and allotted them an inheritance by lot
and made the tribes of Israel dwell in their tents.


56 Yet they tested and rebelled against the Most High God
and did not keep his testimonies,
57 but turned back and acted treacherously like their fathers;
they twisted like a deceitful bow.
58 For they provoked him to anger with their high places
and moved him to jealousy with their idols.
59 God heard and was full of wrath,
and he utterly rejected Israel.


60 He abandoned the dwelling at Shiloh,
the tent where he had dwelled among men,
61 and he gave his strength into captivity
and his glory into the hand of the foe.
62 He gave his people over to the sword
and was furious with his inheritance.
63 Fire devoured their young men,
and their maidens had no marriage song.
64 Their priests fell by the sword,
and their widows made no lamentation.


65 Then the Lord awoke as from sleep,
like a warrior shouting because of wine.
66 And he struck his enemies back;
he put them to everlasting shame.
67 He rejected the tent of Joseph;
he did not choose the tribe of Ephraim,
68 but he chose the tribe of Judah,
Mount Zion, which he loved.
69 He built his sanctuary like the heights,
like the earth which he has established forever.


70 He chose David his servant
and took him from the sheepfolds;
71 from tending the ewes that nurse
he brought him to shepherd Jacob his people,
and Israel his inheritance.
72 So he shepherded them according to the integrity of his heart
and guided them with skillful hands.




Chapter 79


1 O God, the nations have come into your inheritance;
they have defiled your holy temple;
they have laid Jerusalem in ruins.
2 They have given the dead bodies of your servants as food for the birds of the heavens,
the flesh of your faithful ones to the beasts of the earth.
3 They have poured out their blood like water all around Jerusalem,
and there was no one to bury them.
4 We have become a reproach to our neighbors,
a mockery and derision to those around us.


5 How long, O LORD? Will you be angry forever?
Will your jealousy burn like fire?
6 Pour out your wrath on the nations that do not know you,
and on the kingdoms that do not call on your name.
7 For they have devoured Jacob
and laid waste his habitation.


8 Do not remember our former iniquities;
let your compassion come quickly to meet us,
for we are brought very low.
9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name;
deliver us and atone for our sins, for your name’s sake.
10 Why should the nations say, “Where is their God?”
Let the avenging of the blood of your servants that has been shed
be known among the nations before our eyes.


11 Let the groaning of the prisoner come before you;
according to the greatness of your power, preserve those doomed to die.
12 Return sevenfold into the lap of our neighbors
the reproach with which they have reproached you, O Lord.
13 But we, your people and the sheep of your pasture,
will give thanks to you forever;
from generation to generation we will recount your praise.




Chapter 80


1 Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel,
you who lead Joseph like a flock.
You who are enthroned upon the cherubim, shine forth
2 before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh.
Stir up your strength
and come to save us.


3 Restore us, O God,
and cause your face to shine, that we may be saved.


4 O LORD God of hosts,
how long will you be angry with the prayer of your people?
5 You have fed them with the bread of tears
and given them tears to drink in full measure.
6 You make us an object of contention to our neighbors,
and our enemies laugh among themselves.


7 Restore us, O God of hosts,
and cause your face to shine, that we may be saved.


8 You brought a vine out of Egypt;
you drove out the nations and planted it.
9 You cleared the ground for it,
and it took deep root and filled the land.
10 The mountains were covered with its shade,
and the mighty cedars with its branches.
11 It sent out its branches to the sea
and its shoots to the River.


12 Why have you broken down its walls,
so that all who pass along the way pluck its fruit?
13 The boar from the forest ravages it,
and all that move in the field feed on it.


14 O God of hosts, return, we pray!
Look down from heaven, and see,
and take care of this vine,
15 even the shoot your right hand has planted,
and the son whom you have made strong for yourself.
16 It is burned with fire; it is cut down;
they perish at the rebuke of your face.


17 Let your hand be upon the man of your right hand,
the son of man whom you have made strong for yourself.
18 Then we shall not turn back from you;
give us life, and we will call upon your name.


19 Restore us, O LORD God of hosts;
cause your face to shine, that we may be saved.




Chapter 81


1 Sing aloud to God our strength;
shout for joy to the God of Jacob.
2 Raise a song; sound the tambourine,
the sweet lyre with the harp.
3 Blow the trumpet at the new moon,
at the full moon, on our feast day.


4 For it is a statute for Israel,
a judgment of the God of Jacob.
5 He established it as a decree in Joseph
when he went out over the land of Egypt.
I heard a language I did not know:


6 “I relieved his shoulder of the burden;
his hands were freed from the basket.
7 In distress you called, and I delivered you;
I answered you in the secret place of thunder;
I tested you at the waters of Meribah. Selah


8 Hear, O my people, and I will admonish you;
O Israel, if you would but listen to me!
9 There shall be no strange god among you;
you shall not bow down to a foreign god.
10 I am the LORD your God,
who brought you up out of the land of Egypt.
Open your mouth wide, and I will fill it.


11 But my people did not listen to my voice;
Israel would not submit to me.
12 So I gave them over to the stubbornness of their heart,
to walk in their own counsels.


13 Oh that my people would listen to me,
that Israel would walk in my ways!
14 I would soon subdue their enemies
and turn my hand against their adversaries.
15 Those who hate the LORD would cringe before him,
and their time of punishment would last forever.
16 But he would feed him with the finest of the wheat,
and with honey from the rock I would satisfy you.




Chapter 82


1 God stands in the divine assembly;
in the midst of the gods he renders judgment.


2 “How long will you judge unjustly
and show partiality to the wicked? Selah
3 Give justice to the weak and the fatherless;
uphold the rights of the afflicted and the destitute.
4 Rescue the weak and the needy;
deliver them from the hand of the wicked.”


5 They have neither knowledge nor understanding;
they walk about in darkness;
all the foundations of the earth are shaken.


6 I said, “You are gods,
sons of the Most High, all of you;
7 nevertheless, like man you shall die,
and fall like any prince.”


8 Arise, O God, judge the earth,
for you shall inherit all the nations.




Chapter 83


1 O God, do not keep silent;
do not hold your peace or be still, O God.


2 Look how your enemies make an uproar;
those who hate you have lifted up their heads.
3 They devise cunning plots against your people;
they conspire against your treasured ones.
4 They say, “Come, let us wipe them out as a nation;
let the name of Israel be remembered no more!”
5 For with one mind they conspire together;
against you they make a conspiracy.


6 The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites,
Moab and the Hagrites,
7 Gebal and Ammon and Amalek,
Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre;
8 even Assyria has joined them;
they have become the arm of the sons of Lot. Selah


9 Do to them as to Midian,
as to Sisera and Jabin at the wadi Kishon,
10 who were destroyed at En-dor,
who became dung for the ground.
11 Make their nobles like Oreb and Zeeb,
and all their princes like Zebah and Zalmunna,
12 who said, “Let us take possession
for ourselves of the pastures of God.”


13 O my God, make them like whirling dust,
like chaff before the wind.
14 As fire consumes the forest,
as flame sets the mountains ablaze,
15 so pursue them with your storm
and terrify them with your tempest.
16 Fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek your name, O LORD.
17 Let them be put to shame and dismayed forever;
let them perish in disgrace,
18 that they may know that you alone,
whose name is the LORD,
are Most High over all the earth.




Chapter 84


1 How lovely are your dwelling places,
O LORD of hosts!
2 My soul longs—indeed, it faints—for the courts of the LORD;
my heart and my flesh cry out for the living God.
3 Even the sparrow has found a home,
and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young—
at your altars, O LORD of hosts, my King and my God.
4 Blessed are those who dwell in your house;
they are ever praising you. Selah


5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in you,
in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
6 As they pass through the Valley of Baca,
they make it a place of springs;
the early rain also covers it with blessings.
7 They go from strength to strength;
each one appears before God in Zion.
8 O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer;
give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah


9 Look upon our shield, O God,
and look upon the face of your anointed.
10 For a day in your courts is better than a thousand elsewhere.
I would rather stand at the threshold of the house of my God
than dwell in the tents of wickedness.
11 For the LORD God is a sun and a shield;
the LORD gives grace and glory;
no good thing does he withhold
from those who walk uprightly.
12 O LORD of hosts,
blessed is the man who trusts in you.




Chapter 85


1 You showed favor to your land, O LORD;
you restored the fortunes of Jacob.
2 You forgave the iniquity of your people;
you covered all their sin. Selah
3 You withdrew all your wrath;
you turned from your burning anger.
4 Restore us, O God of our salvation,
and put away your indignation toward us.


5 Will you be angry with us forever?
Will you prolong your anger from generation to generation?
6 Will you not revive us again,
that your people may rejoice in you?
7 Show us your steadfast love, O LORD,
and grant us your salvation.
8 Let me hear what God the LORD will speak,
for he will speak peace to his people, to his saints—
but let them not return to folly.


9 Surely his salvation is near to those who fear him,
that glory may dwell in our land.
10 Steadfast love and faithfulness meet;
righteousness and peace kiss each other.
11 Faithfulness springs up from the earth,
and righteousness looks down from heaven.
12 Indeed, the LORD will give what is good,
and our land will yield its produce.
13 Righteousness will go before him
and will make his footsteps a pathway.




Chapter 86


1 Incline your ear, O LORD, and answer me,
for I am afflicted and needy.
2 Preserve my life, for I am faithful;
you are my God—save your servant who trusts in you.
3 Be gracious to me, O Lord,
for I cry to you all day long.
4 Gladden the soul of your servant,
for unto you, O Lord, I lift up my soul.


5 For you, O Lord, are good and forgiving,
abounding in steadfast love to all who call on you.
6 Give ear, O LORD, to my prayer;
listen to the voice of my supplications.
7 In the day of my trouble I call on you,
for you will answer me.
8 There is none like you among the gods, O Lord,
nor are there any works like yours.


9 All the nations you have made shall come and bow down before you, O Lord,
and shall glorify your name.
10 For you are great and do wondrous deeds;
and you alone are God.
11 Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk in your truth;
train my heart to fear your name.
12 I will give thanks to you, O Lord my God, with all my heart,
and I will glorify your name forever.


13 For great is your steadfast love toward me;
you have delivered my soul from the depths of the grave.
14 O God, arrogant men have risen up against me,
a band of violent men seeks my life,
and they do not set you before them.
15 But you, O Lord, are a God merciful and gracious,
slow to anger, and abounding in steadfast love and faithfulness.
16 Turn to me and be gracious to me;
give your strength to your servant,
and save the son of your maidservant.
17 Show me a sign for good,
so that those who hate me may see it and be put to shame,
because you, O LORD, have helped me and comforted me.




Chapter 87


1 His foundation is on the holy mountains.
2 The LORD loves the gates of Zion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
3 Glorious things are spoken of you,
O city of God.
4 “I will mention Rahab and Babylon among those who know me;
even Philistia and Tyre, along with Cush will say ‘This one was born there.’”


5 And of Zion it will be said, “This one and that one were born in her,”
and the Most High himself will establish her.
6 The LORD will record, when he registers the peoples,
“This one was born there.”
7 Singers and flute players alike say,
“All my springs are in you.”




Chapter 88


1 O LORD, God of my salvation,
I cry out before you day and night.
2 Let my prayer come before you;
incline your ear to my cry.
3 For my soul is full of troubles,
and my life draws near to the grave.
4 I am counted among those who go down to the pit;
I am like a man without strength,
5 abandoned among the dead,
like the slain who lie in the grave,
whom you remember no more,
for they are cut off from your hand.


6 You have placed me in the lowest pit,
in dark places, in the depths.
7 Your wrath lies heavy upon me,
and you have afflicted me with all your waves. Selah
8 You have put my companions far from me;
you have made me an abomination to them.
I am shut in and cannot escape;
9 my eye grows dim with sorrow.
I call upon you, O LORD, every day;
I spread out my hands to you.


10 Will you work wonders for the dead?
Will the departed rise up to praise you? Selah
11 Is your loyal love declared in the grave,
your faithfulness in the place of destruction?
12 Are your wonders known in the darkness,
or your righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?


13 But I, O LORD, cry to you for help;
in the morning my prayer comes before you.
14 Why, O LORD, do you reject my life?
Why do you hide your face from me?
15 I am afflicted and close to death from my youth;
I suffer your terrors—I am in despair.
16 Your fierce wrath has swept over me;
your terrors have destroyed me.
17 They surround me like a flood all day long;
they close in on me altogether.
18 You have removed lover and friend far from me;
the darkness is my companion.




Chapter 89


1 I will sing of the steadfast love of the LORD forever;
with my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations.
2 For I said, “Steadfast love will be built up forever;
in the heavens you will establish your faithfulness.”


3 “I have made a covenant with my chosen one;
I have sworn to David my servant:
4 ‘I will establish your offspring forever,
and build your throne for all generations.’” Selah


5 The heavens praise your wonders, O LORD,
your faithfulness also in the assembly of the holy ones.
6 For who in the skies can be compared to the LORD?
Who is like the LORD among the sons of God,
7 a God greatly feared in the council of the holy ones,
and awesome above all who are around him?


8 O LORD God of hosts, who is mighty like you, O LORD?
Your faithfulness surrounds you.
9 You rule the raging of the sea;
when its waves rise, you still them.
10 You crushed Rahab like a corpse;
with your strong arm you scattered your enemies.


11 The heavens are yours; the earth also is yours;
the world and all that is in it, you founded them.
12 The north and the south, you created them;
Tabor and Hermon joyously praise your name.
13 You have a mighty arm;
strong is your hand, exalted is your right hand.


14 Righteousness and justice are the foundation of your throne;
steadfast love and faithfulness go before your face.
15 Blessed are the people who know the festal shout,
who walk, O LORD, in the light of your face,
16 who rejoice in your name all day long,
and in your righteousness they are exalted.
17 For you are the glory of their strength,
and by your favor our horn is lifted up.
18 For our shield belongs to the LORD,
and our king to the Holy One of Israel.


19 Then you spoke in a vision to your faithful one and said:
“I have set a crown on one who is mighty;
I have exalted one chosen from the people.
20 I have found David my servant;
with my holy oil I have anointed him,
21 so that my hand shall be established with him;
my arm also shall strengthen him.


22 The enemy shall not outwit him;
the son of wickedness shall not humble him.
23 I will crush his foes before him
and strike down those who hate him.
24 My faithfulness and my steadfast love shall be with him,
and in my name his horn shall be exalted.
25 I will set his hand on the sea
and his right hand on the rivers.
26 He shall cry to me, ‘You are my Father,
my God, and the Rock of my salvation.’
27 And I will make him the firstborn,
the highest of the kings of the earth.


28 My steadfast love I will keep for him forever,
and my covenant shall stand firm for him.
29 I will establish his offspring forever
and his throne as the days of the heavens.


30 If his sons forsake my law
and do not walk according to my rules,
31 if they violate my statutes
and do not keep my commandments,
32 then I will punish their transgression with the rod
and their iniquity with stripes;


33 but I will not remove from him my steadfast love
or be false to my faithfulness.
34 I will not violate my covenant
or alter the word that went forth from my lips.


35 Once for all I have sworn by my holiness;
I will not lie to David.
36 His offspring shall endure forever,
his throne as long as the sun before me.
37 Like the moon it shall be established forever,
a faithful witness in the skies.” Selah


38 But you have cast off and rejected;
you are full of wrath against your anointed.
39 You have renounced the covenant with your servant;
you have defiled his crown in the dust.
40 You have broken down all his walls;
you have brought his strongholds to ruin.
41 All who pass by plunder him;
he has become the scorn of his neighbors.
42 You have exalted the right hand of his foes;
you have made all his enemies rejoice.
43 You have also turned back the edge of his sword,
and you have not made him stand in battle.


44 You have ended his splendor
and cast his throne to the ground.
45 You have shortened the days of his youth;
you have covered him with shame. Selah


46 How long, O LORD? Will you hide yourself forever?
How long will your wrath burn like fire?
47 Remember how short my time is!
For what futility have you created all the sons of man?
48 What man can live and never see death?
Who can deliver his life from the power of the grave? Selah


49 Lord, where is your steadfast love of old,
which you swore to David in your faithfulness?
50 Remember, O Lord, the reproach of your servants—
how I bear in my heart the taunts of all the many nations,
51 with which your enemies mock, O LORD,
with which they mock the footsteps of your anointed.


52 Blessed be the LORD forever!
Amen and Amen.




Chapter 90


1 Lord, you have been our dwelling place
in all generations.


2 Before the mountains were born,
or you brought forth the earth and the world,
from everlasting to everlasting you are God.


3 You turn man back to dust
and say, “Return, sons of man.”
4 For a thousand years in your sight
are like yesterday when it passes,
or like a watch in the night.


5 You sweep them away like a flood; they are like a dream,
like grass that is renewed in the morning.
6 In the morning it flourishes and is renewed;
in the evening it fades and withers.


7 For we are consumed by your anger,
and by your wrath we are dismayed.
8 You have set our iniquities before you,
our secret sins in the light of your presence.


9 For all our days pass away under your wrath;
we bring our years to an end like a sigh.
10 The days of our years are seventy,
or if by strength, eighty;
yet their pride is but toil and trouble;
they are soon gone, and we fly away.


11 Who considers the power of your anger,
and your wrath according to the fear that is due you?


12 So teach us to number our days
that we may gain a heart of wisdom.


13 Return, O LORD! How long?
Have compassion on your servants.
14 Satisfy us in the morning with your steadfast love,
that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.


15 Make us glad for as many days as you have afflicted us,
for as many years as we have seen evil.
16 Let your work be shown to your servants,
and your majesty to their children.


17 Let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us,
and establish the work of our hands upon us;
yes, establish the work of our hands.




Chapter 91


1 He who dwells in the shelter of the Most High
will abide in the shadow of the Almighty.
2 I will say of the LORD, “My refuge and my fortress,
my God, in whom I trust.”


3 For he will deliver you from the snare of the fowler
and from the deadly pestilence.
4 He will cover you with his feathers,
and under his wings you will take refuge;
His faithfulness is a shield and buckler.


5 You will not fear the terror of the night,
nor the arrow that flies by day,
6 nor the pestilence that stalks in darkness,
nor the destruction that lays waste at noonday.


7 A thousand may fall at your side,
and ten thousand at your right hand,
but it will not come near you.
8 You will only look with your eyes
and see the recompense of the wicked.


9 For you have made the LORD your refuge,
the Most High your dwelling place.
10 No evil shall befall you,
no plague shall draw near your tent.


11 For he will command his angels concerning you
to guard you in all your ways.
12 On their hands they will lift you up,
so you do not strike your foot against a stone.
13 You will tread upon the lion and the cobra;
the young lion and the serpent you will trample underfoot.


14 “Because he has set his love upon me, I will deliver him;
I will set him on high, because he knows my name.
15 He will call upon me, and I will answer him;
I will be with him in trouble,
I will rescue him and honor him.
16 With long life I will satisfy him
and show him my salvation.”




Chapter 92


1 It is good to give thanks to the LORD,
and to sing praises to your name, O Most High,
2 to declare your steadfast love in the morning,
and your faithfulness by night,
3 with the ten-stringed lute and the harp,
with the melody of the lyre.


4 For you, O LORD, have made me glad by your work;
at the deeds of your hands I sing for joy.
5 How great are your works, O LORD!
Your thoughts are very deep.


6 A brutish man does not know,
nor does a fool understand this:
7 though the wicked sprout like grass
and all evildoers flourish,
they will be destroyed forever.
8 But you, O LORD, are in heaven forever.


9 For I see your enemies, O LORD,
only look how your enemies will perish;
all evildoers will be scattered.


10 But you have exalted my horn like that of the wild ox;
you have anointed me with fresh oil.
11 My eyes have seen the downfall of my enemies;
my ears have heard of the doom of the evildoers who rise up against me.


12 The righteous will flourish like the palm tree
and grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
13 Planted in the house of the LORD,
they will flourish in the courts of our God.
14 They will still bear fruit in old age;
they will be full of sap and fresh,
15 declaring that the LORD is upright;
He is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in Him.




Chapter 93


1 The LORD reigns; He is clothed with majesty;
the LORD is clothed; He has girded Himself with strength;
indeed, the world is established; it shall not be moved.
2 Your throne is established from of old;
You are from everlasting.
3 The floods have lifted up, O LORD,
the floods have lifted up their voice;
the floods lift up their pounding waves.
4 More than the voices of many waters,
more than the mighty breakers of the sea,
the LORD on high is mighty.
5 Your testimonies are very sure;
holiness befits Your house,
O LORD, forevermore.




Chapter 94


1 O LORD, God of vengeance,
God of vengeance, shine forth.
2 Rise up, O Judge of the earth;
repay the proud what they deserve.


3 How long shall the wicked, O LORD,
how long shall the wicked exult?
4 They pour out arrogant words;
all the evildoers boast of themselves.
5 They crush Your people, O LORD,
and afflict Your heritage.
6 They kill the widow and the sojourner,
and murder the fatherless.


7 And they say, “The LORD does not see;
the God of Jacob does not understand.”
8 Understand, you senseless among the people;
and you fools, when will you become wise?


9 He who planted the ear, does He not hear?
He who formed the eye, does He not see?
10 He who disciplines nations, will He not punish,
He who teaches man knowledge?
11 The LORD knows the thoughts of man,
that they are but a breath.


12 Blessed is the man whom You discipline, O LORD,
and teach out of Your law,
13 to give him rest from days of trouble,
until a pit is dug for the wicked.
14 For the LORD will not forsake His people;
He will not abandon His heritage.
15 For judgment will again be righteous,
and all the upright in heart will follow it.


16 Who will rise up for me against the wicked?
Who will stand for me against evildoers?
17 If the LORD had not been my help,
my soul would soon have dwelt in silence.
18 When I said, “My foot is slipping,”
Your steadfast love, O LORD, supported me.
19 When my anxious thoughts multiplied within me,
Your consolations delighted my soul.


20 Can a throne of destruction be allied with You,
one that frames mischief by statute?
21 They band together against the life of the righteous,
and condemn the innocent to death.
22 But the LORD has been my stronghold,
and my God the rock of my refuge.
23 And He will repay them for their iniquity,
and will destroy them for their evil;
the LORD our God will destroy them.




Chapter 95


1 Oh come, let us sing to the LORD;
let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
2 Let us come before His presence with thanksgiving;
let us make a joyful noise to Him with songs of praise.


3 For the LORD is a great God,
and a great King above all gods.
4 In His hand are the depths of the earth;
the heights of the mountains are His also.


5 The sea is His, for He made it,
and His hands formed the dry land.
6 Oh come, let us worship and bow down;
let us kneel before the LORD our Maker.


7 For He is our God,
and we are the people of His pasture
and the sheep of His hand.
Today, if you hear His voice,
8 do not harden your heart, as at Meribah,
as on the day at Massah in the wilderness,
9 when your fathers tested Me,
they tried Me, though they had seen My work.


10 For forty years I loathed that generation
and said, “They are a people who go astray in their heart,
and they have not known My ways.”
11 Therefore I swore in My wrath,
“They shall not enter My rest.”




Chapter 96


1 Sing to the LORD a new song;
sing to the LORD, all the earth.
2 Sing to the LORD, bless His name;
proclaim His salvation from day to day.
3 Declare His glory among the nations,
His marvelous works among all the peoples.


4 For great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised;
He is to be feared above all gods.
5 For all the gods of the nations are idols,
but the LORD made the heavens.
6 Splendor and majesty are before Him;
strength and beauty are in His sanctuary.


7 Ascribe to the LORD, O families of the nations,
ascribe to the LORD glory and strength.
8 Ascribe to the LORD the glory due His name;
bring an offering, and come into His courts.
9 Worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness;
tremble before Him, all the earth.


10 Say among the nations, “The LORD reigns!
Yes, the world is established; it shall not be moved;
He will judge the peoples with equity.”
11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad;
let the sea roar, and all that fills it.
12 Let the field exult, and everything in it;
then shall all the trees of the forest sing for joy
13 before the LORD, for He comes,
for He comes to judge the earth.
He will judge the world in righteousness,
and the peoples in His truth.




Chapter 97


1 The LORD reigns, let the earth rejoice;
let the many coastlands be glad.
2 Clouds and thick darkness are around Him;
righteousness and justice are the foundation of His throne.
3 Fire goes before Him
and burns up His adversaries all around.
4 His lightnings light up the world;
the earth sees and trembles.


5 The mountains melt like wax before the LORD,
before the Lord of all the earth.
6 The heavens declare His righteousness,
and all the peoples see His glory.
7 All who serve carved images are put to shame,
those who boast in idols;
worship Him, all you gods.
8 Zion hears and is glad,
and the daughters of Judah rejoice,
because of Your judgments, O LORD.


9 For You, O LORD, are Most High over all the earth;
You are exalted far above all gods.
10 O you who love the LORD, hate evil!
He preserves the lives of His saints;
He delivers them from the hand of the wicked.
11 Light is sown for the righteous,
and joy for the upright in heart.
12 Rejoice in the LORD, you righteous,
and give thanks to His holy name.




Chapter 98


1 Sing to the LORD a new song,
for He has done marvelous things;
His right hand and His holy arm
have worked salvation for Him.
2 The LORD has made known His salvation;
He has revealed His righteousness in the sight of the nations.
3 He has remembered His steadfast love and faithfulness
to the house of Israel.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation of our God.


4 Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth;
break forth into joyful song and sing praises.
5 Sing praises to the LORD with the lyre,
with the lyre and the sound of melody.
6 With trumpets and the sound of the horn,
make a joyful noise before the King, the LORD.


7 Let the sea roar, and all that fills it,
the world and those who dwell in it.
8 Let the rivers clap their hands;
let the mountains sing together for joy
9 before the LORD, for He comes to judge the earth.
He will judge the world with righteousness,
and the peoples with equity.




Chapter 99


1 The LORD reigns; let the nations tremble.
He sits enthroned upon the cherubim; let the earth quake.
2 The LORD is great in Zion;
He is exalted over all the nations.


3 Let them praise Your great and awesome name.
Holy is He.
4 The strength of the King loves justice.
You have established equity;
You have executed justice and righteousness in Jacob.


5 Exalt the LORD our God;
worship at His footstool.
Holy is He.
6 Moses and Aaron were among His priests,
and Samuel also among those who called upon His name.
They called to the LORD, and He answered them.


7 In a pillar of cloud He spoke to them;
they kept His testimonies
and the statute that He gave them.
8 O LORD our God, You answered them;
a forgiving God were You to them,
but an avenger of their deeds.


9 Exalt the LORD our God,
and worship at His holy mountain;
for the LORD our God is holy.




Chapter 100


1 Make a joyful noise to the LORD, all the earth.
2 Serve the LORD with gladness;
come before Him with joyful singing.
3 Know that the LORD, He is God.
It is He who made us, and not we ourselves;
we are His people, and the sheep of His pasture.
4 Enter His gates with thanksgiving,
and His courts with praise.
Give thanks to Him, bless His name.
5 For the LORD is good;
His steadfast love endures forever,
and His faithfulness to all generations.




Chapter 101


1 I will sing of steadfast love and justice;
to You, O LORD, I will make music.
2 I will ponder the way that is blameless.
Oh, when will You come to me?
I will walk with integrity of heart within my house.
3 I will not set before my eyes
anything that is worthless.
I hate the work of those who fall away;
it shall not cling to me.
4 A perverse heart shall be far from me;
I will know nothing of evil.
5 Whoever slanders his neighbor in secret,
him I will put to silence;
whoever has haughty eyes and an arrogant heart,
him I will not endure.
6 My eyes will be on the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with me;
he who walks in the way that is blameless,
he shall minister to me.
7 No one who practices deceit
shall dwell in my house;
no one who utters lies
shall continue before my eyes.
8 Morning by morning I will destroy
all the wicked of the land,
cutting off all evildoers
from the city of the LORD.




Chapter 102


1 Hear my prayer, O LORD,
and let my cry come to You.
2 Do not hide Your face from me
in the day of my distress.
Incline Your ear to me;
in the day when I call, answer me speedily.
3 For my days pass away like smoke,
and my bones burn like a furnace.


4 My heart is struck down like grass and withers;
I forget to eat my bread.
5 Because of my loud groaning
my bones cling to my flesh.


6 I am like a desert owl of the wilderness;
I am like an owl of the waste places.
7 I lie awake;
I am like a lonely bird on a housetop.


8 All day long my enemies taunt me;
those who deride me use my name for a curse.
9 For I eat ashes like bread
and mingle my drink with tears,
10 because of Your indignation and wrath;
for You have lifted me up and cast me down.


11 My days are like a lengthening shadow;
and I wither away like grass.
12 But You, O LORD, are enthroned forever;
Your name endures to all generations.


13 You will arise and have compassion on Zion;
for it is the time to show favor to her;
the appointed time has come.
14 For Your servants hold her stones dear
and have pity on her dust.


15 The nations will fear the name of the LORD,
and all the kings of the earth Your glory.
16 For the LORD builds up Zion;
He appears in His glory.
17 He regards the prayer of the destitute
and does not despise their prayer.


18 Let this be written for a generation to come,
so that a people yet to be created may praise the LORD,
19 that He looked down from His holy height,
from heaven the LORD looked at the earth,
20 to hear the groaning of the prisoner,
to set free those doomed to die,
21 that they may declare in Zion the name of the LORD,
and in Jerusalem His praise,
22 when peoples gather together,
and kingdoms, to serve the LORD.


23 He has broken my strength in midcourse;
He has shortened my days.
24 I say, “O my God,
do not take me away in the midst of my days—
Your years endure throughout all generations.”
25 Of old You laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of Your hands.
26 They will perish, but You remain;
they will all wear out like a garment.
You will change them like a robe,
and they will pass away.
27 But You are the same,
and Your years have no end.
28 The children of Your servants shall dwell secure;
their offspring shall be established before You.




Chapter 103


1 Bless the LORD, O my soul,
and all that is within me, bless His holy name.
2 Bless the LORD, O my soul,
and do not forget all His benefits,
3 who forgives all your iniquity,
who heals all your diseases,
4 who redeems your life from the pit,
who crowns you with steadfast love and mercy,
5 who satisfies you with good
so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.


6 The LORD works righteousness
and justice for all who are oppressed.
7 He made known His ways to Moses,
His acts to the children of Israel.
8 The LORD is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love.
9 He will not always contend,
nor will He keep His anger forever.


10 He does not deal with us according to our sins,
nor repay us according to our iniquities.
11 For as high as the heavens are above the earth,
so great is His steadfast love toward those who fear Him.
12 As far as the east is from the west,
so far does He remove our transgressions from us.
13 As a father has compassion on his children,
so the LORD has compassion on those who fear Him.


14 For He knows our frame;
He remembers that we are dust.
15 As for man, his days are like grass;
he flourishes like a flower of the field;
16 for the wind passes over it, and it is gone,
and its place knows it no more.


17 But the steadfast love of the LORD
is from everlasting to everlasting on those who fear Him,
and His righteousness to their children’s children,
18 to those who keep His covenant
and remember to do His commandments.


19 The LORD has established His throne in the heavens,
and His kingdom rules over all.
20 Bless the LORD, you His angels,
mighty in strength, who do His word,
obeying the voice of His word.
21 Bless the LORD, all His hosts,
His ministers, who do His will.
22 Bless the LORD, all His works,
in all places of His dominion.
Bless the LORD, O my soul.




Chapter 104


1 Bless the LORD, O my soul.
O LORD my God, You are very great;
You are clothed with splendor and majesty,
2 covering Yourself with light as with a garment,
stretching out the heavens like a tent.


3 He lays the beams of His chambers on the waters;
He makes the clouds His chariot;
He rides on the wings of the wind.
4 He makes His messengers winds,
His ministers a flaming fire.


5 He set the earth on its foundations,
so that it should never be moved.
6 You covered it with the deep as with a garment;
the waters stood above the mountains.
7 At Your rebuke they fled;
at the sound of Your thunder they took to flight.
8 The mountains rose, the valleys sank down
to the place that You appointed for them.
9 You set a boundary that they may not pass,
so that they might not again cover the earth.


10 You make springs gush forth in the valleys;
they flow between the hills;
11 they give drink to every beast of the field;
the wild donkeys quench their thirst.
12 Beside them the birds of the heavens dwell;
they sing among the branches.


13 From Your lofty abode You water the mountains;
the earth is satisfied with the fruit of Your work.
14 You cause the grass to grow for the cattle,
and plants for man to cultivate,
that he may bring forth food from the earth,
15 and wine to gladden the heart of man,
oil to make his face shine,
and bread to strengthen man’s heart.


16 The trees of the LORD are well watered,
the cedars of Lebanon that He planted.
17 In them the birds build their nests;
the stork has her home in the fir trees.
18 The high mountains are for the wild goats;
the cliffs are a refuge for the rock badgers.


19 He made the moon to mark the seasons;
the sun knows its time for setting.
20 You make darkness, and it is night,
when all the beasts of the forest creep about.


21 The young lions roar for their prey,
seeking their food from God.
22 When the sun rises, they withdraw
and lie down in their dens.
23 Man goes out to his work
and to his labor until the evening.


24 O LORD, how manifold are Your works!
In wisdom You have made them all;
the earth is full of Your creatures.
25 Here is the sea, great and wide,
which teems with creatures innumerable,
living things both small and great.
26 There go the ships,
and Leviathan, which You formed to play in it.


27 These all look to You,
to give them their food in due season.
28 When You give it to them, they gather it up;
when You open Your hand, they are filled with good things.
29 When You hide Your face, they are dismayed;
when You take away their breath, they die
and return to their dust.
30 When You send forth Your Spirit, they are created,
and You renew the face of the ground.


31 May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD rejoice in His works,
32 who looks on the earth and it trembles,
who touches the mountains and they smoke.


33 I will sing to the LORD as long as I live;
I will sing praise to my God while I have being.
34 May my meditation be pleasing to Him,
for I rejoice in the LORD.


35 Let sinners be consumed from the earth,
and let the wicked be no more.
Bless the LORD, O my soul.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 105


1 Give thanks to the LORD, call upon His name;
make known His deeds among the peoples.
2 Sing to Him, sing praises to Him;
tell of all His wondrous works.
3 Glory in His holy name;
let the hearts of those who seek the LORD rejoice.
4 Seek the LORD and His strength;
seek His face continually.


5 Remember the wondrous works that He has done,
His miracles, and the judgments He uttered,
6 O offspring of Abraham His servant,
children of Jacob, His chosen ones.
7 He is the LORD our God;
His judgments are in all the earth.
8 He remembers His covenant forever,
the word that He commanded, for a thousand generations,
9 the covenant that He made with Abraham,
His sworn promise to Isaac,
10 which He confirmed to Jacob as a statute,
to Israel as an everlasting covenant,
11 saying, “To you I will give the land of Canaan,
as your portion for an inheritance.”


12 When they were few in number,
of little account, and sojourners in it,
13 wandering from nation to nation,
from one kingdom to another people,
14 He allowed no man to oppress them;
He rebuked kings on their account,
15 saying, “Do not touch My anointed ones,
do My prophets no harm.”


16 When He summoned a famine on the land
and broke all supply of bread,
17 He had sent a man ahead of them,
Joseph, who was sold as a slave.
18 His feet were hurt with fetters;
his neck was put in a collar of iron;
19 until what he had said came to pass,
the word of the LORD tested him.


20 The king sent and released him;
the ruler of the peoples set him free;
21 he made him lord of his house
and ruler of all his possessions,
22 to bind his princes at his pleasure
and to teach his elders wisdom.


23 Then Israel came to Egypt;
Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
24 And the LORD made His people very fruitful
and made them stronger than their foes.
25 He turned their hearts to hate His people,
to deal craftily with His servants.


26 He sent Moses His servant,
and Aaron, whom He had chosen.
27 They performed His signs among them,
and miracles in the land of Ham.
28 He sent darkness, and made the land dark;
and they did not rebel against His words.
29 He turned their waters into blood
and caused their fish to die.
30 Their land swarmed with frogs,
even in the chambers of their kings.
31 He spoke, and there came swarms of flies,
and gnats throughout their land.
32 He gave them hail for rain,
and fiery bolts in their land.
33 He struck down their vines and fig trees
and shattered the trees of their territory.
34 He spoke, and the locusts came,
young locusts without number,
35 which devoured all the vegetation in their land
and ate up the fruit of their ground.
36 He struck down all the firstborn in their land,
the firstfruits of all their strength.


37 Then He brought out Israel with silver and gold,
and there was none among His tribes who stumbled.
38 Egypt was glad when they departed,
for dread of them had fallen upon them.
39 He spread a cloud for a covering,
and fire to give light by night.
40 They asked, and He brought quail,
and He gave them bread from heaven in abundance.
41 He opened the rock, and water gushed out;
it flowed through the desert like a river.
42 For He remembered His holy promise,
and Abraham His servant.


43 So He brought His people out with joy,
His chosen ones with singing.
44 And He gave them the lands of the nations,
and they inherited the fruit of the peoples’ labor,
45 that they might keep His statutes
and observe His laws.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 106


1 Praise the LORD.
Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good,
for His steadfast love endures forever.


2 Who can utter the mighty deeds of the LORD,
or declare all His praise?


3 Blessed are those who observe justice,
who do righteousness at all times.


4 Remember me, O LORD, when You show favor to Your people;
help me when You save them,
5 that I may see the prosperity of Your chosen ones,
that I may rejoice in the gladness of Your nation,
that I may glory with Your inheritance.


6 We have sinned, both we and our fathers;
we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly.
7 Our fathers, when they were in Egypt,
did not consider Your wondrous works;
they did not remember the abundance of Your steadfast love,
but rebelled by the sea, at the Red Sea.
8 Yet He saved them for His name’s sake,
that He might make known His mighty power.


9 He rebuked the Red Sea, and it became dry,
and He led them through the deep as through a desert.
10 So He saved them from the hand of the foe
and redeemed them from the power of the enemy.
11 And the waters covered their adversaries;
not one of them was left.
12 Then they believed His words;
they sang His praise.


13 But they soon forgot His works;
they did not wait for His counsel.
14 They had a wanton craving in the wilderness,
and put God to the test in the desert.
15 He gave them what they asked,
but sent a wasting disease among them.


16 When men in the camp were jealous of Moses
and Aaron, the holy one of the LORD,
17 the earth opened and swallowed up Dathan,
and covered the company of Abiram.
18 Fire also broke out in their company;
the flame burned up the wicked.


19 They made a calf in Horeb
and worshiped a metal image.
20 They exchanged the glory of God
for the image of an ox that eats grass.
21 They forgot God, their Savior,
who had done great things in Egypt,
22 wondrous works in the land of Ham,
and awesome deeds by the Red Sea.
23 Therefore He said He would destroy them—
had not Moses, His chosen one,
stood in the breach before Him,
to turn away His wrath from destroying them.


24 Then they despised the pleasant land,
having no faith in His promise.
25 They murmured in their tents,
and did not obey the voice of the LORD.
26 Therefore He lifted His hand
and swore to them
that He would make them fall in the wilderness,
27 and would make their offspring fall among the nations,
scattering them among the lands.


28 Then they yoked themselves to Baal of Peor,
and ate sacrifices offered to the dead;
29 they provoked the LORD to anger with their deeds,
and a plague broke out among them.
30 Then Phinehas stood up and intervened,
and the plague was stayed.
31 And that was counted to him as righteousness
from generation to generation forever.


32 They angered Him at the waters of Meribah,
and it went ill with Moses on their account,
33 for they made his spirit bitter,
and he spoke rashly with his lips.
34 They did not destroy the peoples,
as the LORD commanded them,
35 but they mixed with the nations
and learned to do as they did.
36 They served their idols,
which became a snare to them.
37 They sacrificed their sons
and their daughters to the demons;
38 they poured out innocent blood,
the blood of their sons and daughters,
whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan,
and the land was polluted with blood.
39 Thus they became unclean by their acts,
and played the whore in their deeds.
40 Then the anger of the LORD was kindled against His people,
and He abhorred His inheritance.


41 He gave them into the hand of the nations,
so that those who hated them ruled over them.
42 Their enemies oppressed them,
and they were brought into subjection under their power.
43 Many times He delivered them,
but they were rebellious in their purposes
and were brought low through their iniquity.
44 Nevertheless, He looked upon their distress,
when He heard their cry.


45 For their sake He remembered His covenant,
and relented according to the abundance of His steadfast love.
46 He caused them to be pitied
by all those who held them captive.
47 Save us, O LORD our God,
and gather us from among the nations,
that we may give thanks to Your holy name
and glory in Your praise.
48 Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from everlasting to everlasting.
And let all the people say, “Amen!”
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 107


1 Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good,
for His steadfast love endures forever.
2 Let the redeemed of the LORD say so,
whom He has redeemed from the hand of the enemy,
3 and gathered in from the lands,
from the east and from the west,
from the north and from the sea.
4 They wandered in the wilderness, in a desert way;
they found no city to dwell in.
5 Hungry and thirsty,
their soul fainted within them.
6 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and He delivered them from their distresses.
7 He led them by a straight way,
till they reached a city to dwell in.
8 Let them thank the LORD for His steadfast love,
for His wondrous works to the sons of man.
9 For He satisfies the longing soul,
and the hungry soul He fills with good things.


10 Some sat in darkness and in the shadow of death,
prisoners in affliction and in irons,
11 for they had rebelled against the words of God,
and spurned the counsel of the Most High.
12 So He humbled their heart with labor;
they stumbled, and there was none to help.
13 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and He delivered them from their distresses.
14 He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death,
and broke their bonds apart.
15 Let them thank the LORD for His steadfast love,
for His wondrous works to the sons of man.
16 For He shatters the doors of bronze
and cuts in two the bars of iron.


17 Fools, through their sinful ways,
and because of their iniquities, were afflicted.
18 Their soul loathed any kind of food,
and they drew near to the gates of death.
19 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and He delivered them from their distresses.
20 He sent out His word and healed them,
and delivered them from their destruction.
21 Let them thank the LORD for His steadfast love,
for His wondrous works to the sons of man.
22 And let them offer sacrifices of thanksgiving,
and tell of His deeds with songs of joy.


23 Those who went down to the sea in ships,
doing business on the mighty waters,
24 they saw the deeds of the LORD,
His wondrous works in the deep.
25 For He spoke and raised the stormy wind,
which lifted up the waves of the sea.
26 They mounted up to heaven; they went down to the depths;
their courage melted away in their calamity.
27 They reeled and staggered like drunken men,
and were at their wits’ end.
28 Then they cried to the LORD in their trouble,
and He delivered them from their distresses.
29 He made the storm be still,
and the waves of the sea were hushed.
30 Then they were glad that the waters were quiet,
and He brought them to their desired haven.
31 Let them thank the LORD for His steadfast love,
for His wondrous works to the sons of man.
32 Let them extol Him in the congregation of the people,
and praise Him in the assembly of the elders.


33 He turns rivers into a desert,
springs of water into thirsty ground,
34 a fruitful land into a salty waste,
because of the wickedness of its inhabitants.
35 He turns a desert into pools of water,
a parched land into springs of water.
36 And there He makes the hungry dwell,
and they establish a city to dwell in.
37 They sow fields and plant vineyards,
and get a fruitful yield.
38 By His blessing they multiply greatly,
and He does not let their cattle diminish.
39 When they are diminished and brought low
through oppression, evil, and sorrow,
40 He pours contempt on princes
and makes them wander in trackless wastes;
41 but He raises up the needy out of affliction
and makes their families like flocks.
42 The upright see it and are glad,
and all wickedness shuts its mouth.
43 Whoever is wise, let him attend to these things;
let them consider the steadfast love of the LORD.




Chapter 108


1 My heart is steadfast, O God;
I will sing, I will make melody with all my being.
2 Awake, harp and lyre!
I will awaken the dawn.


3 I will give thanks to You, O LORD, among the nations;
I will sing praises to You among the peoples.
4 For great above the heavens is Your steadfast love;
Your faithfulness reaches to the skies.


5 Be exalted, O God, above the heavens,
and let Your glory be over all the earth.
6 That Your beloved ones may be delivered,
give salvation by Your right hand and answer me.


7 God has spoken in His holiness:
“I will exult, I will divide up Shechem
and portion out the Valley of Succoth.
8 Gilead is Mine; Manasseh is Mine;
Ephraim is the helmet of My head;
Judah is My scepter.
9 Moab is My washbasin;
upon Edom I cast My shoe;
over Philistia I shout in triumph.”
10 Who will bring me to the fortified city?
Who will lead me to Edom?


11 Have You not rejected us, O God?
You do not go forth, O God, with our armies.
12 Give us help against the foe,
for vain is the salvation of man.
13 With God we shall do valiantly;
it is He who will tread down our foes.




Chapter 109


1 O God of my praise, do not be silent.
2 For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful
have opened against me;
they have spoken to me with a lying tongue.
3 They encircle me with words of hatred,
and attack me without cause.


4 In return for my love they accuse me,
but I am all prayer.
5 So they repay me evil for good,
and hatred for my love.


6 Appoint a wicked man over him,
and let an accuser stand at his right hand.
7 When he is judged, let him come out guilty;
and let his prayer become sin.
8 Let his days be few;
let another take his office.
9 Let his children be fatherless,
and his wife a widow.
10 Let his children wander about and beg,
let them seek sustenance far from their ruined homes.


11 Let the creditor seize all that he has;
let strangers plunder the fruit of his labor.
12 Let there be none to extend kindness to him,
nor any to be gracious to his fatherless children.
13 Let his posterity be cut off;
in the generation to come let their name be blotted out.
14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered before the LORD,
and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.


15 Let them be before the LORD continually,
that He may cut off the memory of them from the earth.
16 Because he did not remember to show kindness,
but pursued the afflicted and poor man,
and the brokenhearted, to put him to death.


17 He loved cursing, and it came upon him;
he did not delight in blessing, and it was far from him.
18 He clothed himself with cursing as his garment,
and it came into his body like water,
and like oil into his bones.


19 Let it be to him as the garment he wraps around him,
and as a belt he always wears.
20 Let this be the LORD’s repayment to my accusers,
and to those who speak evil against my life.


21 But You, O LORD my Lord,
act on my behalf for Your name’s sake;
because Your steadfast love is good, deliver me.
22 For I am afflicted and needy,
and my heart is wounded within me.


23 I fade away like a shadow at evening;
I am shaken off like a locust.
24 My knees are weak from fasting,
and my flesh grows lean with no fat.


25 I have become a reproach to them;
when they see me, they shake their heads.
26 Help me, O LORD my God;
save me according to Your steadfast love,
27 that they may know that this is Your hand;
that You, O LORD, have done it.
28 Let them curse, but You bless;
when they rise up, let them be put to shame,
but Your servant will rejoice.
29 Let my accusers be clothed with dishonor;
let them cover themselves with their own shame as with a cloak.


30 With my mouth I will give great thanks to the LORD;
I will praise Him in the midst of the multitude.
31 For He stands at the right hand of the needy,
to save him from those who condemn his soul to death.




Chapter 110


1 The LORD says to my lord:
“Sit at My right hand,
until I make your enemies your footstool.”
2 The LORD will stretch forth the scepter of Your strength from Zion,
saying, “Rule in the midst of Your enemies.”


3 Your people will offer themselves freely on the day of Your power,
in holy garments;
from the womb of the dawn,
the dew of Your youth is Yours.
4 The LORD has sworn
and will not change His mind,
“You are a priest forever
after the order of Melchizedek.”


5 The Lord is at Your right hand;
He will shatter kings on the day of His wrath.
6 He will judge among the nations, filling them with corpses;
He will shatter the head over the wide earth.
7 He will drink from the brook by the way;
therefore He will lift up His head.




Chapter 111


1 Praise the LORD.
I will give thanks to the LORD with my whole heart,
in the council of the upright, and in the congregation.


2 Great are the works of the LORD,
studied by all who delight in them.
3 Splendid and majestic is His work,
and His righteousness endures forever.


4 He has caused His wonders to be remembered;
the LORD is gracious and merciful.
5 He provides food for those who fear Him;
He remembers His covenant forever.


6 He has shown His people the power of His works,
in giving them the inheritance of the nations.
7 The works of His hands are faithful and just;
all His precepts are trustworthy.
8 They are established forever and ever,
to be performed with faithfulness and uprightness.


9 He sent redemption to His people;
He has commanded His covenant forever.
Holy and awesome is His name.
10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom;
all who practice them have good understanding.
His praise endures forever.




Chapter 112


1 Praise the LORD!
Blessed is the man who fears the LORD,
who greatly delights in His commandments.
2 His offspring will be mighty in the land;
the generation of the upright will be blessed.
3 Wealth and riches are in his house,
and his righteousness endures forever.
4 Light rises in the darkness for the upright;
He is gracious, compassionate, and righteous.
5 It is well with the man who deals generously and lends;
who conducts his affairs with justice.
6 For the righteous will never be shaken;
he will be remembered forever.
7 He is not afraid of bad news;
his heart is steadfast, trusting in the LORD.
8 His heart is secure; he will not be afraid,
until he looks in triumph on his adversaries.
9 He has distributed freely, he has given to the poor;
his righteousness endures forever;
his horn will be exalted in honor.
10 The wicked man sees it and is angry;
he gnashes his teeth and melts away;
the desire of the wicked will perish.




Chapter 113


1 Praise the LORD!
Praise, O servants of the LORD,
praise the name of the LORD!
2 Blessed be the name of the LORD
from this time forth and forevermore!
3 From the rising of the sun to its setting,
the name of the LORD is to be praised!


4 The LORD is high above all nations,
and His glory above the heavens.
5 Who is like the LORD our God,
who is seated on high,
6 who looks far down
on the heavens and the earth?


7 He raises the poor from the dust
and lifts the needy from the ash heap,
8 to make them sit with princes,
with the princes of His people.
9 He gives the barren woman a home,
making her the joyous mother of children.
Praise the LORD!




Chapter 114


1 When Israel went out from Egypt,
the house of Jacob from a people of strange speech,
2 Judah became His sanctuary,
Israel His dominion.


3 The sea saw and fled;
the Jordan turned back.
4 The mountains skipped like rams,
the hills like lambs.


5 What ails you, O sea, that you flee?
O Jordan, that you turn back?
6 O mountains, that you skip like rams?
O hills, like lambs?


7 Tremble, O earth, at the presence of the Lord,
at the presence of the God of Jacob,
8 who turns the rock into a pool of water,
the flint into a spring of water.




Chapter 115


1 Not to us, O LORD, not to us,
but to Your name give glory,
because of Your steadfast love,
because of Your faithfulness.


2 Why should the nations say,
“Where now is their God?”
3 Our God is in the heavens;
He does whatever He pleases.
4 Their idols are silver and gold,
the work of human hands.
5 They have mouths, but do not speak;
eyes, but do not see.
6 They have ears, but do not hear;
noses, but do not smell.
7 They have hands, but do not feel;
feet, but do not walk;
they make no sound in their throat.
8 Those who make them will become like them,
everyone who trusts in them.


9 O Israel, trust in the LORD;
He is their help and their shield.
10 O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD;
He is their help and their shield.
11 You who fear the LORD, trust in the LORD;
He is their help and their shield.


12 The LORD has remembered us; He will bless us;
He will bless the house of Israel;
He will bless the house of Aaron.
13 He will bless those who fear the LORD,
the small together with the great.


14 May the LORD give you increase,
you and your children.
15 May you be blessed by the LORD,
the Maker of heaven and earth.


16 The heavens are the heavens of the LORD,
but the earth He has given to the sons of man.
17 The dead do not praise the LORD,
nor do any who go down into silence.
18 But we will bless the LORD
from this time forth and forever.
Hallelujah.




Chapter 116


1 I love the LORD, for He has heard my voice
and my pleas for mercy.
2 Because He has inclined His ear to me,
I will call on Him as long as I live.


3 The cords of death encompassed me,
and the terrors of the grave found me;
I found distress and sorrow.
4 Then I called on the name of the LORD:
“O LORD, I pray, deliver my life!”


5 Gracious is the LORD, and righteous;
our God is compassionate.
6 The LORD preserves the simple;
I was brought low, and He saved me.
7 Return, my soul, to your rest,
for the LORD has dealt bountifully with you.


8 For You have delivered my life from death,
my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling.
9 I will walk before the LORD in the land of the living.


10 I believed, even when I said,
“I am greatly afflicted.”
11 I said in my alarm,
“All men are liars.”


12 What shall I render to the LORD
for all His benefits toward me?
13 I will lift up the cup of salvation
and call on the name of the LORD.
14 I will pay my vows to the LORD
in the presence of all His people.


15 Precious in the sight of the LORD
is the death of His faithful ones.
16 O LORD, I am indeed Your servant;
I am Your servant, the son of Your maidservant;
You have loosed my bonds.
17 I will offer to You the sacrifice of thanksgiving
and call on the name of the LORD.
18 I will pay my vows to the LORD
in the presence of all His people,
19 in the courts of the house of the LORD,
in your midst, O Jerusalem.
Hallelujah.




Chapter 117


1 Praise the LORD, all nations; extol Him, all peoples.
2 For His steadfast love prevails over us,
and the faithfulness of the LORD endures forever.
Hallelujah.




Chapter 118


1 Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
for His steadfast love endures forever.


2 Let Israel say,
“His steadfast love endures forever.”
3 Let the house of Aaron say,
“His steadfast love endures forever.”
4 Let those who fear the LORD say,
“His steadfast love endures forever.”


5 Out of distress I called upon the LORD;
the LORD answered me and set me in a spacious place.
6 The LORD is with me;
I will not fear. What can man do to me?
7 The LORD is with me, as my helper;
therefore I will look in triumph on those who hate me.


8 It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in man.
9 It is better to take refuge in the LORD than to trust in princes.


10 All nations surrounded me;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
11 They surrounded me, yes, they surrounded me;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
12 They surrounded me like bees;
they were extinguished like a fire of thorns;
in the name of the LORD I cut them off.
13 You pushed me hard to make me fall,
but the LORD helped me.


14 The LORD is my strength and my song;
He has become my salvation.
15 A sound of joyful shouting and salvation is in the tents of the righteous;
the right hand of the LORD does valiantly.
16 The right hand of the LORD is exalted;
the right hand of the LORD does valiantly.
17 I shall not die, but live,
and declare the works of the LORD.
18 The LORD has disciplined me severely,
but He has not given me over to death.


19 Open to me the gates of righteousness;
I will enter through them, I will give thanks to the LORD.
20 This is the gate of the LORD;
the righteous shall enter through it.
21 I give You thanks, for You have answered me
and have become my salvation.


22 The stone the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone.
23 This is the LORD’s doing;
it is marvelous in our eyes.
24 This is the day the LORD has made;
let us rejoice and be glad in it.


25 O LORD, save now, I pray;
O LORD, grant success, I pray.
26 Blessed is he who comes in the name of the LORD;
we bless you from the house of the LORD.
27 The LORD is God, and He has given us light;
bind the festal sacrifice with cords to the horns of the altar.


28 You are my God, and I will give You thanks;
You are my God, I will exalt You.


29 Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good;
for His steadfast love endures forever.




Chapter 119


1 Blessed are the undefiled in the way,
who walk in the law of the LORD.
2 Blessed are those who keep His testimonies,
who seek Him with all their heart.
3 They also do no iniquity;
they walk in His ways.
4 You have commanded Your precepts,
that they be kept diligently.
5 Oh, that my ways were established
to keep Your statutes!
6 Then I would not be ashamed
when I regard all Your commandments.
7 I will give You thanks with an upright heart
when I learn Your righteous judgments.
8 I will keep Your statutes;
do not utterly forsake me.


9 How can a young man keep his way pure?
By guarding it according to Your word.
10 With all my heart I have sought You;
let me not stray from Your commandments.
11 I have treasured Your word in my heart,
that I might not sin against You.
12 Blessed are You, O LORD;
teach me Your statutes.
13 With my lips I have declared
all the judgments of Your mouth.
14 I rejoice in the way of Your testimonies
as much as in all riches.
15 I will meditate on Your precepts
and regard Your ways.
16 I will delight in Your statutes;
I will not forget Your word.


17 Deal bountifully with Your servant,
that I may live and keep Your word.
18 Open my eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things from Your law.
19 I am a sojourner on the earth;
do not hide Your commandments from me.
20 My soul is consumed with longing
for Your judgments at all times.
21 You rebuke the proud, the cursed,
who wander from Your commandments.
22 Remove from me scorn and contempt,
for I have kept Your testimonies.
23 Even though princes sit and speak against me,
Your servant meditates on Your statutes.
24 Your testimonies are my delight,
they are my counselors.


25 My soul clings to the dust;
revive me according to Your word.
26 I have declared my ways, and You answered me;
teach me Your statutes.
27 Make me understand the way of Your precepts,
that I may meditate on Your wondrous works.
28 My soul weeps because of grief;
strengthen me according to Your word.
29 Remove from me the way of falsehood,
and graciously grant me Your law.
30 I have chosen the way of faithfulness;
I have set Your judgments before me.
31 I cling to Your testimonies, O LORD;
do not let me be put to shame.
32 I will run in the way of Your commandments,
for You enlarge my heart.


33 Teach me, O LORD, the way of Your statutes,
and I will keep it to the end.
34 Give me understanding, that I may keep Your law
and observe it with my whole heart.
35 Make me walk in the path of Your commandments,
for in it I delight.
36 Incline my heart to Your testimonies,
and not to dishonest gain.
37 Turn my eyes away from worthless things,
and revive me in Your ways.
38 Establish Your word to Your servant,
which leads to the fear of You.
39 Turn away my reproach which I dread,
for Your judgments are good.
40 Behold, I long for Your precepts;
revive me in Your righteousness.
41 Let Your steadfast love come to me, O LORD, Your salvation according to Your word.
42 So I will have an answer for him who reproaches me, for I trust in Your word.
43 Do not take the word of truth utterly from my mouth, for I wait for Your judgments.
44 So I will keep Your law continually, forever and ever.
45 And I will walk in liberty, for I seek Your precepts.
46 I will speak of Your testimonies before kings and will not be ashamed.
47 I will delight in Your commandments, which I love.
48 I will lift up my hands to Your commandments, which I love, and I will meditate on Your statutes.


49 Remember the word to Your servant, in which You have made me hope.
50 This is my comfort in my affliction, that Your word has revived me.
51 The arrogant utterly deride me, but I do not turn aside from Your law.
52 I remember Your judgments of old, O LORD, and I take comfort.
53 Rage seizes me because of the wicked, who forsake Your law.
54 Your statutes have been my songs in the house of my sojourning.
55 I remember Your name in the night, O LORD, and keep Your law.
56 This has been mine, that I have kept Your precepts.


57 The LORD is my portion; I have promised to keep Your words.
58 I entreat Your favor with all my heart; be gracious to me according to Your word.
59 I have considered my ways and turned my feet to Your testimonies.
60 I hasten and do not delay to keep Your commandments.
61 The cords of the wicked surround me, but I have not forgotten Your law.
62 At midnight I rise to give thanks to You because of Your righteous judgments.
63 I am a companion of all who fear You and of those who keep Your precepts.
64 The earth is full of Your steadfast love, O LORD; teach me Your statutes.


65 You have dealt well with Your servant, O LORD, according to Your word.
66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I believe in Your commandments.
67 Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep Your word.
68 You are good and do good; teach me Your statutes.
69 The arrogant smear me with lies, but I keep Your precepts with all my heart.
70 Their heart is unfeeling like fat, but I delight in Your law.
71 It is good for me that I was afflicted, that I might learn Your statutes.
72 The law of Your mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver pieces.


73 Your hands made me and fashioned me; give me understanding that I may learn Your commandments.
74 Those who fear You shall see me and rejoice, because I hope in Your word.
75 I know, O LORD, that Your judgments are righteous, and that in faithfulness You have afflicted me.
76 Let Your steadfast love now comfort me, according to Your promise to Your servant.
77 Let Your compassion come to me, that I may live, for Your law is my delight.
78 Let the arrogant be ashamed, for they have wronged me with falsehood; I will meditate on Your precepts.
79 Let those who fear You turn to me, and those who know Your testimonies.
80 Let my heart be blameless in Your statutes, that I may not be put to shame.


81 My soul longs for Your salvation; I hope in Your word.
82 My eyes fail for Your promise, saying, “When will You comfort me?”
83 For I have become like a wineskin in the smoke, yet I do not forget Your statutes.
84 How many are the days of Your servant? When will You execute judgment on those who persecute me?
85 The proud have dug pits for me, those who do not live according to Your law.
86 All Your commandments are faithful; they persecute me with falsehood—help me!
87 They almost consumed me on the earth, but I have not forsaken Your precepts.
88 Revive me according to Your steadfast love, that I may keep the testimony of Your mouth.


89 Forever, O LORD, Your word is firmly fixed in the heavens.
90 Your faithfulness endures to all generations; You established the earth, and it stands.
91 They stand this day according to Your ordinances, for all things are Your servants.
92 If Your law had not been my delight, I would have perished in my affliction.
93 I will never forget Your precepts, for by them You have given me life.
94 I am Yours; save me, for I have sought Your precepts.
95 The wicked lie in wait to destroy me, but I consider Your testimonies.
96 I have seen a limit to all perfection, but Your commandment is exceedingly broad.


97 Oh, how I love Your law! It is my meditation all the day.
98 Your commandments make me wiser than my enemies, for they are ever with me.
99 I have more insight than all my teachers, for Your testimonies are my meditation.
100 I understand more than the aged, because I keep Your precepts.
101 I have restrained my feet from every evil way, that I may keep Your word.
102 I have not turned aside from Your judgments, for You Yourself have taught me.
103 How sweet are Your words to my taste, sweeter than honey to my mouth!
104 Through Your precepts I get understanding; therefore I hate every false way.


105 Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.
106 I have sworn and confirmed to keep Your righteous judgments.
107 I am afflicted very much; revive me, O LORD, according to Your word.
108 Accept, O LORD, the freewill offerings of my mouth, and teach me Your judgments.
109 My life is continually in my hand, yet I do not forget Your law.
110 The wicked have set a snare for me, yet I have not strayed from Your precepts.
111 Your testimonies are my heritage forever, for they are the joy of my heart.
112 I have inclined my heart to perform Your statutes forever, to the end.


113 I hate the double-minded, but I love Your law.
114 You are my hiding place and my shield; I hope in Your word.
115 Depart from me, evildoers, that I may keep the commandments of my God.
116 Uphold me according to Your word, that I may live, and do not let me be ashamed of my hope.
117 Hold me up, that I may be safe and have regard for Your statutes continually.
118 You reject all who stray from Your statutes, for their deceit is falsehood.
119 You remove all the wicked of the earth like dross; therefore I love Your testimonies.
120 My flesh trembles for fear of You, and I am afraid of Your judgments.


121 I have done what is just and right; do not leave me to my oppressors.
122 Guarantee the welfare of Your servant; let not the proud oppress me.
123 My eyes fail for Your salvation and for the fulfillment of Your righteous promise.
124 Deal with Your servant according to Your steadfast love, and teach me Your statutes.
125 I am Your servant; give me understanding, that I may know Your testimonies.
126 It is time for the LORD to act, for they have broken Your law.
127 Therefore I love Your commandments above gold, yes, above fine gold.
128 Therefore I regard all Your precepts as right in every way; I hate every false path.


129 Your testimonies are wonderful; therefore my soul keeps them.
130 The unfolding of Your words gives light; it gives understanding to the simple.
131 I open my mouth and pant, because I long for Your commandments.
132 Turn to me and be gracious to me, as is Your way with those who love Your name.
133 Establish my steps by Your word, and let no iniquity have dominion over me.
134 Redeem me from the oppression of man, that I may keep Your precepts.
135 Make Your face shine upon Your servant, and teach me Your statutes.
136 Streams of tears flow from my eyes, because men do not keep Your law.


137 Righteous are You, O LORD, and upright are Your judgments.
138 You have commanded Your testimonies in righteousness and great faithfulness.
139 My zeal consumes me, because my foes forget Your words.
140 Your word is very pure, and Your servant loves it.
141 I am small and despised, yet I do not forget Your precepts.
142 Your righteousness is everlasting, and Your law is truth.
143 Trouble and distress have come upon me, yet Your commandments are my delight.
144 The righteousness of Your testimonies is everlasting; give me understanding, that I may live.


145 I call with my whole heart; answer me, O LORD. I will keep Your statutes.
146 I call to You; save me, that I may observe Your testimonies.
147 I rise before dawn and cry for help; I hope in Your word.
148 My eyes are awake before the watches of the night, that I may meditate on Your promise.
149 Hear my voice according to Your steadfast love; O LORD, revive me according to Your justice.
150 Those who pursue wickedness draw near; they are far from Your law.
151 You are near, O LORD, and all Your commandments are truth.
152 Long have I known from Your testimonies that You have established them forever.


153 Look upon my affliction and deliver me, for I do not forget Your law.
154 Plead my cause and redeem me; revive me according to Your promise.
155 Salvation is far from the wicked, for they do not seek Your statutes.
156 Great are Your mercies, O LORD; revive me according to Your ordinances.
157 Many are my persecutors and my foes, yet I do not turn from Your testimonies.
158 I look upon the faithless with loathing, because they do not keep Your word.
159 Consider how I love Your precepts; revive me, O LORD, according to Your steadfast love.
160 The sum of Your word is truth, and every one of Your righteous ordinances endures forever.


161 Princes persecute me without cause, but my heart stands in awe of Your word.
162 I rejoice at Your word as one who finds great spoil.
163 I hate and abhor falsehood, but I love Your law.
164 Seven times a day I praise You because of Your righteous judgments.
165 Great peace have those who love Your law, and nothing causes them to stumble.
166 I hope for Your salvation, O LORD, and I do Your commandments.
167 My soul keeps Your testimonies, and I love them exceedingly.
168 I keep Your precepts and Your testimonies, for all my ways are before You.


169 Let my cry come near before You, O LORD; give me understanding according to Your word.
170 Let my supplication come before You; deliver me according to Your promise.
171 My lips will pour forth praise, for You teach me Your statutes.
172 My tongue will sing of Your word, for all Your commandments are righteous.
173 Let Your hand be ready to help me, for I have chosen Your precepts.
174 I long for Your salvation, O LORD, and Your law is my delight.
175 Let my soul live and praise You, and let Your ordinances help me.
176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek Your servant, for I do not forget Your commandments.




Chapter 120


1 In my distress I called to the LORD,
 and He answered me.
2 Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips,
 from a deceitful tongue.
3 What shall be given to you,
 and what more shall be done to you, deceitful tongue?
4 Sharp arrows of the warrior,
 with burning coals of the broom tree.


5 Woe to me, that I sojourn in Meshech,
 that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!
6 Too long has my soul had its dwelling
 with those who hate peace.
7 I am for peace,
 but when I speak, they are for war.




Chapter 121


1 I lift up my eyes to the mountains—
 from where will my help come?
2 My help comes from the LORD,
 the Maker of heaven and earth.


3 He will not allow your foot to slip;
 your Keeper will not slumber.
4 Behold, He who keeps Israel
 will neither slumber nor sleep.


5 The LORD is your Keeper;
 the LORD is your shade at your right hand.
6 The sun will not strike you by day,
 nor the moon by night.


7 The LORD will keep you from all evil;
 He will keep your soul.
8 The LORD will keep your going out and your coming in
 from this time forth and forever.


***
Chapter 122


1 I rejoiced when they said to me,
 “Let us go to the house of the LORD.”
2 Our feet have been standing
 within your gates, O Jerusalem.


3 Jerusalem, built as a city
 that is joined together as one,
4 to which the tribes go up,
 the tribes of the LORD,
 as a statute for Israel
 to give thanks to the name of the LORD.
5 For there thrones for judgment were set,
 the thrones of the house of David.


6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
 “May those who love you be secure.
7 May there be peace within your walls,
 prosperity within your palaces.”
8 For the sake of my brothers and my companions,
 I will now say, “Peace be within you.”
9 For the sake of the house of the LORD our God,
 I will seek your good.




Chapter 123


1 To you I lift up my eyes,
 you who are enthroned in the heavens.
2 As the eyes of a servant look to the hand of his master,
 as the eyes of a maidservant to the hand of her mistress,
 so our eyes look to the LORD our God,
 until he shows us favor.


3 Show us favor, O LORD, show us favor,
 for we have had our fill of contempt.
4 Our soul has had its fill
 of the mockery of the self-assured,
 of the contempt of the proud.




Chapter 124


1 “If the LORD had not been for us,”
 let Israel now say,
2 “If the LORD had not been for us
 when men rose up against us,
3 then they would have swallowed us alive,
 when their anger burned against us;
4 then the waters would have swept us away,
 a torrent would have passed over us;
5 then over us would have passed
 the raging waters.”


6 Blessed be the LORD,
 who has not given us as prey to their teeth.
7 Our soul has escaped like a bird
 out of the snare of the fowlers;
 the snare is broken, and we have escaped.


8 Our help is in the name of the LORD,
 the Maker of heaven and earth.




Chapter 125


1 Those who trust in the LORD are like Mount Zion,
 which cannot be moved but abides forever.
2 As the mountains surround Jerusalem,
 so the LORD surrounds his people now and forever.
3 The scepter of the wicked shall not rest
 over the allotted portion of the righteous;
 lest the righteous extend their hands to iniquity.
4 Do good, O LORD, to those who are good,
 to the upright in heart.
5 But as for those who turn aside to crooked ways,
 the LORD will lead them away with evildoers.
 Peace be upon Israel.




Chapter 126


1 When the LORD restored the fortunes of Zion,
 we were like men who dream.
2 Then our mouth was filled with laughter,
 and our tongue with shouts of joy;
 then they said among the nations,
 “The LORD has done great things for them.”
3 The LORD has done great things for us;
 we rejoiced.


4 Restore our fortunes, O LORD,
 like streams in the Negev.
5 Those who sow with tears
 shall reap with shouts of joy.
6 He goes along weeping,
 carrying the bag of seed;
 he shall surely come with shouts of joy,
 carrying his sheaves.




Chapter 127


1 Unless the LORD builds the house,
 its builders labor in vain;
 unless the LORD watches over the city,
 the watchman stays awake in vain.
2 It is in vain that you rise early,
 that you sit up late,
 eating the bread of toil;
 for he gives sleep to his beloved.
3 Sons are an inheritance from the LORD,
 the fruit of the womb a reward.
4 Like arrows in the hand of a warrior,
 so are the sons of one’s youth.
5 Blessed is the man whose quiver is filled with them;
 he shall not be put to shame
 when he speaks with his enemies in the gate.




Chapter 128


1 Blessed is every man who fears the LORD,
 who walks in his ways.
2 You shall eat the labor of your hands;
 you shall be blessed, and it shall be well with you.
3 Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine
 within your house;
 your sons like olive shoots
 around your table.
4 Yes, in this way shall the man be blessed
 who fears the LORD.
5 May the LORD bless you from Zion,
 that you may see the good of Jerusalem
 all the days of your life;
6 and that you may see your sons’ sons.
 Peace upon Israel.




Chapter 129


1 “Greatly have they afflicted me from my youth”—
 let Israel now say—
2 “Greatly have they afflicted me from my youth,
 yet they have not prevailed against me.
3 The plowmen plowed upon my back;
 they made their furrows long.”
4 The LORD is righteous;
 he has cut the cords of the wicked.
5 Let all who hate Zion
 be put to shame and turned backward.
6 Let them be like grass on the housetops,
 which withers before it is pulled up,
7 with which the reaper does not fill his hand,
 nor the binder of sheaves his arms;
8 and none who pass by say,
 “The blessing of the LORD be upon you;
 we bless you in the name of the LORD.”




Chapter 130


1  From the depths I call to you, O LORD;
  2  Lord, hear my voice;
    let your ears be attentive
    to my plea for mercy.


3  If you should mark iniquities, Lord,
  Lord, who could stand?
4  But with you there is forgiveness,
  so that you may be feared.


5  I wait for the LORD—my soul waits—
  and in his word I hope;
6  my soul waits for the Lord
  more than watchmen for the morning,
  more than watchmen for the morning.


7  O Israel, wait for the LORD,
  for with the LORD is steadfast love,
  and with him is abundant redemption.
8  And he will redeem Israel
  from all his iniquities.




Chapter 131


1 LORD, my heart is not proud,
 nor are my eyes lifted high,
 nor have I walked in great matters
 or in things too wondrous for me.
2 Surely I have composed and quieted my soul,
 like a weaned child with his mother;
 like a weaned child upon me is my soul.


3 Let Israel wait for the LORD
 from now until forever.




Chapter 132


1 LORD, remember for David
 all his hardship—
2 how he swore to the LORD,
 vowed to the Mighty One of Jacob:
3 “I will not enter the tent of my house;
 I will not go up upon the couch of my bed;
4 I will not give sleep to my eyes,
 slumber to my eyelids,
5 until I find a place for the LORD,
 a dwelling for the Mighty One of Jacob.”


6 Look, we heard of it in Ephrathah;
 we found it in the fields of the forest.
7 Let us go into his dwelling-place;
 let us bow down at his footstool.


8 Rise, LORD, to your resting-place,
 you and the ark of your strength.
9 Let your priests be clothed with righteousness,
 and let your faithful ones shout for joy.
10 For the sake of David your servant,
 do not turn away the face of your anointed.


11 The LORD swore to David in truth—
 he will not turn from it—
 “From the fruit of your body I will set one upon your throne.
12 If your sons keep my covenant
 and my testimonies that I teach them,
 their sons also will sit upon your throne forever.”


13 For the LORD has chosen Zion;
 he has desired it for his dwelling:
14 “This is my resting-place forever;
 here I will dwell, for I have desired it.
15 I will bless its provisions abundantly;
 I will satisfy its needy with bread.
16 I will clothe its priests with salvation,
 and its faithful ones will shout loudly for joy.
17 There I will cause a horn for David to spring up;
 I have set in place a lamp for my anointed.
18 His enemies I will clothe with shame,
 but upon him his crown will shine.”




Chapter 133


1 How good and how pleasant it is
 for brothers to dwell together in unity.
2 It is like the precious oil on the head,
 running down upon the beard,
 running down upon Aaron’s beard,
 running down over the collar of his robes.
3 It is like the dew of Hermon
 coming down upon the mountains of Zion,
 for there the LORD commanded the blessing —
 life forever.


Chapter 134


1 Come! Praise the LORD, all you servants of the LORD,
 who stand by night in the house of the LORD.
2 Lift up your hands in holiness
 and bless the LORD.
3 May the LORD bless you from Zion,
 the Maker of heaven and earth.




Chapter 135


1 Praise the LORD. Praise the name of the LORD;
 praise Him, you servants of the LORD,
2 you who stand in the house of the LORD,
 in the courts of the house of our God.
3 Praise the LORD, for the LORD is good;
 sing to His name, for it is pleasant.
4 For the LORD has chosen Jacob for Himself,
 Israel as His treasured possession.
5 I know that the LORD is great,
 and our Lord is above all gods.
6 Whatever the LORD desires He does,
 in heaven and on earth,
 in the seas and all the depths.
7 He brings up clouds from the ends of the earth;
 He makes lightning for the rain;
 He brings the wind out of His storehouses.
8 He struck the firstborn of Egypt,
 both of man and of beast.
9 He sent signs and wonders into your midst, Egypt,
 against Pharaoh and all his servants.
10 He struck down many nations
 and killed mighty kings,
11 Sihon king of the Amorites,
 and Og king of Bashan,
 and all the kingdoms of Canaan.
12 He gave their land as a heritage,
 a heritage to Israel His people.
13 Your name, LORD, endures forever;
 Your remembrance, LORD, through all generations.
14 For the LORD will judge His people
 and will have compassion on His servants.
15 The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
 the work of human hands.
16 They have mouths but do not speak;
 they have eyes but do not see;
17 they have ears but do not hear,
 nor is there breath in their mouths.
18 Those who make them become like them,
 all who trust in them.
19 House of Israel, bless the LORD;
 house of Aaron, bless the LORD;
20 house of Levi, bless the LORD;
 you who fear the LORD, bless the LORD.
21 Bless the LORD from Zion,
 He who dwells in Jerusalem.
 Praise the LORD.


Chapter 136


1 Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
2 Give thanks to the God of gods,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
3 Give thanks to the Lord of lords,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
4 To Him who alone does great wonders,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
5 To Him who made the heavens with understanding,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
6 To Him who spread out the earth upon the waters,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
7 To Him who made the great lights,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
8 The sun to rule by day,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
9 The moon and stars to rule by night,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
10 To Him who struck Egypt through their firstborn,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
11 And brought Israel out from among them,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
12 With a strong hand and an outstretched arm,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
13 To Him who divided the Sea of Reeds into parts,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
14 And made Israel pass through the midst of it,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
15 And shook off Pharaoh and his army into the Sea of Reeds,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
16 To Him who led His people through the wilderness,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
17 To Him who struck great kings,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
18 And killed mighty kings,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
19 Sihon king of the Amorites,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
20 And Og king of Bashan,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
21 And gave their land as a heritage,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
22 A heritage to Israel His servant,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
23 Who remembered us in our low estate,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
24 And rescued us from our adversaries,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
25 Who gives food to all flesh,
 for His loyal love endures forever.
26 Give thanks to the God of heaven,
 for His loyal love endures forever.




Chapter 137


1 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down,
 we also wept when we remembered Zion.
2 On the willows in its midst
 we hung up our lyres.
3 For there our captors demanded songs of us,
 and our tormentors asked for joy, saying,
 “Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.”
4 How can we sing the song of the LORD
 on foreign soil?
5 If I forget you, O Jerusalem,
 may my right hand forget its skill.
6 May my tongue cling to my palate
 if I do not remember you,
 if I do not set Jerusalem
 above my highest joy.
7 Remember, LORD, against the sons of Edom
 the day of Jerusalem,
 when they said, “Tear it down,
 tear it down to its foundations!”
8 Daughter of Babylon, doomed to destruction,
 blessed is he who repays you
 for what you have done to us.
9 Blessed is he who seizes your little ones
 and dashes them against the rock.


Chapter 138


1 I will give you thanks with all my heart;
 before the gods I will sing your praise.
2 I will bow toward your holy temple
 and give thanks to your name for your loyal love and your faithfulness,
 for you have exalted your word above every name.
3 On the day I called, you answered me;
 you made me bold with strength in my soul.
4 All the kings of the earth will give you thanks, LORD,
 for they have heard the words of your mouth.
5 And they will sing of the ways of the LORD,
 for great is the glory of the LORD.
6 For though the LORD is exalted,
 he sees the lowly,
 but the lofty he knows from afar.
7 Though I walk in the midst of distress, you preserve my life;
 you stretch out your hand against the anger of my enemies,
 and your right hand saves me.
8 The LORD will complete what concerns me;
 your loyal love, LORD, is everlasting—
 do not abandon the work of your hands.




Chapter 139


1 LORD, you have searched me and known me.
2 You know my sitting down and my rising up;
 you discern my thoughts from afar.
3 You measure out my path and my lying down,
 and you are acquainted with all my ways.
4 For there is not a word on my tongue,
 but you, LORD, know it completely.
5 You hem me in behind and before,
 and you lay your hand upon me.
6 Such knowledge is too extraordinary for me;
 it is too high—I cannot reach it.


7 Where can I go from your Spirit?
 Or where can I flee from your presence?
8 If I ascend to the heavens, you are there;
 if I make my bed in the grave, you are there.
9 If I lift up the wings of the dawn,
 if I dwell at the farthest end of the sea,
10 even there your hand will lead me,
 and your right hand will take hold of me.
11 And if I say, “Surely darkness will cover me,”
 then the night becomes light around me.
12 Even darkness is not dark to you,
 and the night shines like the day;
 darkness and light are alike to you.


13 For you formed my inward parts;
 you knit me together in my mother’s womb.
14 I will give you thanks, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made;
 your works are wonderful—my soul knows this very well.
15 My frame was not hidden from you
 when I was made in secret,
 woven in the depths of the earth.
16 Your eyes saw my unformed substance,
 and in your book all of them were written—
 the days that were fashioned for me,
 when none of them yet existed.
17 How precious to me are your thoughts, O God;
 how vast is their sum!
18 If I should count them, they would outnumber the sand;
 when I awake, I am still with you.


19 O that you would slay the wicked, O God—
 and men of blood, depart from me!
20 They speak of you with evil intent;
 your adversaries take your name in vain.
21 Do I not hate those who hate you, LORD?
 And do I not loathe those who rise up against you?
22 I hate them with complete hatred;
 I count them as my enemies.


23 Search me, O God, and know my heart;
 test me and know my anxious thoughts.
24 And see if any harmful way is in me,
 and lead me in the everlasting way.


Chapter 140


1 Deliver me, O LORD, from an evil man; preserve me from a violent man.
2 Who think up evil in their heart all day; war is in their hearts when they dwell.
3 Their tongue is sharp as a serpent’s; the venom of a viper lies under their lips. Selah
4 Keep me, LORD, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from violent men who have purposed to make my feet slip.
5 The arrogant have set a trap for me; with ropes they spread a net by the path; they have hidden snares for me. Selah
6 I said to the LORD, “You are my God; listen to the voice of my supplication, LORD.”
7 O LORD God, the strength of my salvation, you cover my head in the day of battle.
8 Do not grant, LORD, the desires of the wicked; do not let their evil plan succeed, or they will be exalted. Selah
9 Let the mischief of their lips cover those who surround me.
10 Let burning coals fall upon them; let them be thrown into the fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.
11 A slanderer shall not be established in the land; the violent and wicked man shall be hunted with thrust upon thrust.
12 I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted, and the right of the needy.
13 Surely the righteous will give thanks to your name; the upright will dwell in your presence.


Chapter 141


1 LORD, I call to you—hurry to me;
give ear to my voice when I call to you.
2 Let my prayer be set before you like incense,
the lifting up of my hands like the evening offering.
3 Set a guard, LORD, over my mouth;
keep watch at the door of my lips.
4 Do not let my heart incline to an evil thing,
to practice wicked deeds with wicked men;
and let me not eat of their delicacies.
5 Let a righteous man strike me—it is kindness;
let him rebuke me—it is oil on my head; let my head not refuse it.
Yet my prayer is still against their evil deeds.
6 When their judges are thrown down beside rocky cliffs,
they will hear my words, for they are pleasant.
7 As when one plows and breaks up the earth,
so our bones are scattered at the mouth of the grave.
8 But my eyes are toward you, O LORD, my Lord;
in you I seek refuge—do not leave my soul exposed.
9 Keep me from the trap they have set for me,
from the snares of workers of wickedness.
10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets together, while I pass by safely.


Chapter 142


1 With my voice I cry out to the LORD;
with my voice I plead for mercy from the LORD.
2 I pour out my complaint before him;
I lay out my distress before him.
3 When my spirit grows faint within me,
you yourself know my path.
In the way where I walk
they have hidden a trap for me.
4 Look to my right and see—
there is no one who acknowledges me;
refuge has vanished from me;
no one seeks my soul.


5 I cry to you, LORD;
I say, “You are my refuge,
my portion in the land of the living.”
6 Listen to my cry,
for I am brought very low;
rescue me from those who pursue me,
for they are too strong for me.
7 Bring my soul out of the prison,
that I may give thanks to your name;
the righteous will gather around me,
for you will deal generously with me.




Chapter 143


1 Hear my prayer, O LORD; give ear to my cry for mercy;
  in your faithfulness answer me, in your righteousness.
2 Do not enter into judgment with your servant,
  for no man living is righteous before you.
3 For the enemy has pursued my soul;
  he has crushed my life to the ground;
  he has made me dwell in darkness
    like those long dead.
4 And my spirit grows faint within me;
  within me my heart is desolate.
5 I remember the days of old;
  I meditate on all your works;
  I ponder the work of your hands.
6 I stretch out my hands to you;
  my soul thirsts for you like a parched land.
7 Answer me quickly, O LORD;
  my spirit fails.
Do not hide your face from me,
  lest I become like those descending to the grave.
8 Let me hear your steadfast love in the morning,
  for in you I trust.
Make known to me the way I should walk,
  for to you I lift up my soul.
9 Deliver me from my enemies, O LORD;
  I flee to you for refuge.
10 Teach me to do your will,
  for you are my God.
Let your good Spirit lead me
  on level ground.
11 For your name’s sake, O LORD, let me live;
  in your righteousness bring my soul out of distress.
12 And in your steadfast love cut off my enemies
  and destroy all who afflict my soul,
  for I am your servant.


Chapter 144


1 Blessed be the LORD, my rock,
  who trains my hands for war,
  my fingers for battle;
2 my steadfast love and my fortress,
  my stronghold and my deliverer,
  my shield, in whom I take refuge,
  who subdues my foes beneath me.


3 O LORD, what is man that you regard him,
  or the son of man that you take account of him?
4 Man is like a breath;
  his days are like a passing shadow.


5 O LORD, bend your heavens and come down;
  touch the mountains that they may smoke.
6 Flash forth lightning and scatter them;
  shoot your arrows and rout them.
7 Stretch out your hands from on high;
  rescue me and deliver me
  from great waters,
  from the hand of foreigners,
8 whose mouth speaks falsehood,
  and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.


9 I will sing a new song to you, O God;
  on a harp of ten strings I will make melody to you,
10 who gives salvation to kings,
  who rescues David his servant
  from the deadly sword.
11 Rescue me and deliver me
  from the hand of foreigners,
  whose mouth speaks falsehood
  and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.


12 May our sons be like plants grown up in their youth,
  our daughters like corner pillars
  crafted for the structure of a palace;
13 may our storehouses be full,
  yielding all kinds of produce;
may our flocks increase by thousands,
  by tens of thousands in our fields;
14 may our cattle be heavy with young;
  may there be no breach, no going out,
  and no cry of distress in our streets.
15 Blessed are the people to whom such things belong;
  blessed are the people whose God is the LORD.




Chapter 145


1 I will exalt you, my God, the King,
  and I will bless your name forever and ever.
2 Every day I will bless you,
  and I will praise your name forever and ever.
3 Great is the LORD and greatly to be praised,
  and his greatness is unsearchable.
4 One generation will praise your works to the next,
  and will declare your mighty acts.
5 On the glorious splendor of your majesty
  and on your wondrous works I will meditate.
6 And they will speak of the might of your awesome deeds,
  and I will recount your greatness.
7 They will pour forth the memory of your abundant goodness,
  and will sing aloud of your righteousness.
8 The LORD is gracious and compassionate,
  slow to anger and great in steadfast love.
9 The LORD is good to all,
  and his compassion is over all his works.
10 All your works will give thanks to you, O LORD,
  and your saints will bless you.
11 They will speak of the glory of your kingdom,
  and will talk of your might,
12 to make known to the sons of man his mighty deeds,
  and the glorious splendor of his kingdom.
13 Your kingdom is an everlasting kingdom,
  and your dominion endures through all generations.
The LORD is faithful in all his words,
  and kind in all his works.
14 The LORD upholds all who fall,
  and raises up all who are bowed down.
15 The eyes of all look to you,
  and you give them their food in its season.
16 You open your hand
  and satisfy the desire of every living thing.
17 The LORD is righteous in all his ways,
  and kind in all his works.
18 The LORD is near to all who call on him,
  to all who call on him in truth.
19 He fulfills the desire of those who fear him;
  he hears their cry and saves them.
20 The LORD guards all who love him,
  but all the wicked he will destroy.
21 My mouth will speak the praise of the LORD,
  and all flesh will bless his holy name
  forever and ever.




Chapter 146


1 Praise the LORD. Praise the LORD, O my soul.
2 I will praise the LORD while I live;
  I will sing praises to my God while I exist.
3 Do not trust in princes,
  in a son of man in whom there is no salvation.
4 His spirit departs, he returns to the ground;
  on that very day his plans vanish.
5 Blessed is he whose help is the God of Jacob,
  whose hope is in the LORD his God,
6 who made heaven and earth,
  the sea and all that is in them;
  who keeps faith forever;
7 who executes justice for the oppressed,
  who gives bread to the hungry.
The LORD sets prisoners free;
8 the LORD opens the eyes of the blind;
  the LORD raises up those who are bowed down;
  the LORD loves the righteous.
9 The LORD guards the sojourners;
  he upholds the fatherless and the widow,
  but he overthrows the way of the wicked.
10 The LORD will reign forever—
  your God, O Zion, to all generations.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 147


1 Praise the LORD, for it is good to sing praises to our God;
  for it is pleasant, and praise is fitting.
2 The LORD builds Jerusalem;
  he gathers the outcasts of Israel.
3 He heals the brokenhearted
  and binds up their wounds.
4 He counts the number of the stars;
  he gives names to all of them.
5 Great is our Lord and abundant in power;
  his understanding is without measure.
6 The LORD lifts up the afflicted;
  he casts the wicked down to the ground.


7 Sing to the LORD with thanksgiving;
  make melody to our God with the lyre.
8 He covers the sky with clouds;
  he prepares rain for the earth;
  he makes grass grow on the mountains.
9 He gives food to the beasts,
  and to the young ravens when they cry.
10 He does not delight in the strength of the horse;
  he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
11 The LORD takes pleasure in those who fear him,
  in those who hope in his steadfast love.


12 Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem;
  praise your God, O Zion.
13 For he strengthens the bars of your gates;
  he blesses your sons within you.
14 He makes peace in your borders;
  he satisfies you with the finest of wheat.
15 He sends out his command to the earth;
  his word runs swiftly.
16 He gives snow like wool;
  he scatters frost like ashes.
17 He casts forth his ice like crumbs;
  who can stand before his cold?
18 He sends out his word and melts them;
  he makes his wind blow, and the waters flow.
19 He declares his word to Jacob,
  his statutes and his judgments to Israel.
20 He has not dealt thus with any nation;
  and as for his judgments, they do not know them.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 148


1 Praise the LORD. Praise the LORD from the heavens;
  praise him in the heights.
2 Praise him, all his angels;
  praise him, all his hosts.
3 Praise him, sun and moon;
  praise him, all stars of light.
4 Praise him, you highest heavens,
  and you waters above the heavens.
5 Let them praise the name of the LORD,
  for he commanded and they were created.
6 And he established them forever and ever;
  he gave a decree, and it will not pass away.
7 Praise the LORD from the earth,
  you sea monsters and all deeps;
8 fire and hail, snow and mist,
  stormy wind executing his word;
9 mountains and all hills,
  fruit trees and all cedars;
10 beasts and all cattle,
  creeping things and winged birds;
11 kings of the earth and all nations,
  princes and all judges of the earth;
12 young men and also young women,
  old men and youths;
13 let them praise the name of the LORD,
  for his name alone is exalted;
  his majesty is above earth and heaven.
14 And he has raised up a horn for his people,
  a praise for all his saints,
  for the sons of Israel, a people near to him.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 149


1 Praise the LORD. Sing to the LORD a new song,
  his praise in the assembly of the faithful.
2 Let Israel rejoice in his Maker;
  let the sons of Zion be glad in their King.
3 Let them praise his name with dancing;
  let them make melody to him with tambourine and lyre.
4 For the LORD takes pleasure in his people;
  he adorns the afflicted with salvation.
5 Let the faithful exult in glory;
  let them sing aloud on their beds.
6 Let the high praises of God be in their throats,
  and a two-edged sword in their hands,
7 to execute vengeance on the nations,
  and punishments on the peoples,
8 to bind their kings with chains,
  and their nobles with shackles of iron,
9 to execute on them the written judgment—
  this is honor for all his faithful ones.
Praise the LORD.




Chapter 150


1 Praise the LORD. Praise God in his sanctuary;
  praise him in his mighty expanse.
2 Praise him for his mighty deeds;
  praise him according to his abundant greatness.
3 Praise him with the blast of the horn;
  praise him with harp and lyre.
4 Praise him with tambourine and dancing;
  praise him with strings and flute.
5 Praise him with sounding cymbals;
  praise him with cymbals of loud acclaim.
6 Let everything that has breath praise the LORD.
Praise the LORD.