Proverbs


Chapter 1


1 The proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel:


2 To know wisdom and instruction, to discern the sayings of understanding,  
3 to receive instruction in wise behavior, righteousness, justice, and integrity,  
4 to give prudence to the naïve, knowledge and discretion to the youth—  
5 let the wise man hear and increase in learning, and let the man of understanding acquire guidance—  
6 to understand a proverb and a figure, the words of the wise and their riddles.


7 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge; fools despise wisdom and instruction.


8 Hear, my son, your father’s instruction, and do not forsake your mother’s teaching,  
9 for they are a garland of grace on your head and necklaces about your neck.


10 My son, if sinners entice you, do not consent.  
11 If they say, “Come with us, let us lie in wait for blood; let us ambush the innocent without cause;  
12 let us swallow them alive like the grave, and whole, like those who go down to the pit;  
13 we will find all sorts of precious possessions, we will fill our houses with spoil;  
14 cast your lot among us; let us all have one purse”—  
15 my son, do not walk in the way with them; restrain your foot from their path,  
16 for their feet run to evil, and they hasten to shed blood.


17 Surely, in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird,  
18 but they lie in wait for their own blood; they ambush their own lives.  
19 Such are the ways of everyone who gains by violence; it takes away the life of its possessors.


20 Wisdom cries out in the street; she lifts her voice in the public square.  
21 At the head of the noisy streets she calls out; at the entrances of the gates in the city she utters her sayings:  
22 “How long, O naïve ones, will you love simplicity? And how long will scoffers delight in their scoffing, and fools hate knowledge?  
23 Turn at my reproof; behold, I will pour out my spirit to you; I will make my words known to you.


24 Because I called and you refused, I stretched out my hand and no one paid attention,  
25 and you neglected all my counsel and did not want my reproof,  
26 I also will laugh at your calamity; I will mock when your dread comes,  
27 when your dread comes like a storm, and your calamity comes like a whirlwind, when distress and anguish come upon you.


28 Then they will call on me, but I will not answer; they will seek me diligently, but will not find me.  
29 Because they hated knowledge and did not choose the fear of the LORD,  
30 they would not accept my counsel; they spurned all my reproof—  
31 so they shall eat the fruit of their way and be filled with their own devices.  
32 For the waywardness of the naïve will kill them, and the complacency of fools will destroy them.  
33 But he who listens to me will dwell securely and will be at ease, without dread of evil.




Chapter 2


1 My son, if you receive my words and treasure up my commandments within you,
2 making your ear attentive to wisdom, inclining your heart to understanding,
3 yes, if you call out for discernment, raise your voice for understanding.


4 If you seek her like silver and search for her as for hidden treasures,
5 then you will understand the fear of the LORD and find the knowledge of God.


6 For the LORD gives wisdom; from His mouth come knowledge and understanding;
7 He stores up sound wisdom for the upright; He is a shield to those who walk in integrity,
8 guarding the paths of justice and watching over the way of His saints.


9 Then you will understand righteousness and justice and equity—every good path;
10 for wisdom will enter your heart, and knowledge will be pleasant to your soul;
11 discretion will watch over you, understanding will guard you.


12 It will deliver you from the way of evil, from men who speak perverse things,
13 who forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness,
14 who rejoice in doing evil and delight in the perversity of the wicked,
15 whose paths are crooked and who are devious in their ways;


16 Stay away from the strange woman, from the foreign woman with her smooth words,
17 who forsakes the companion of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God;
18 for her house sinks down to death, and her paths to the departed.
19 None who go to her return, nor do they attain the paths of life.


20 So you will walk in the way of the good and keep to the paths of the righteous.
21 For the upright will dwell in the land, and the blameless will remain in it;
22 but the wicked will be cut off from the land, and the treacherous will be uprooted from it.




Chapter 3


1 My son, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart keep my commandments,
2 for length of days and years of life and peace they will add to you.


3 Do not let kindness and truth forsake you; bind them around your neck, write them on the tablet of your heart,
4 so you will find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man.


5 Trust in the LORD with all your heart, and do not lean on your own understanding.
6 In all your ways acknowledge Him, and He will make your paths straight.
7 Do not be wise in your own eyes; fear the LORD and turn away from evil.
8 It will be healing to your flesh and refreshment to your bones.


9 Honor the LORD with your wealth and with the firstfruits of all your produce,
10 then your barns will be filled with plenty, and your vats will overflow with new wine.


11 My son, do not despise the discipline of the LORD, and do not loathe His reproof,
12 for the LORD loves those whom He reproves, as a father the son in whom he delights.


13 Blessed is the man who finds wisdom, and the man who gains understanding,
14 for her profit is better than the profit of silver, and her yield than fine gold.
15 She is more precious than jewels, and nothing you desire can compare with her.
16 Long life is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honor.
17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
18 She is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her; those who hold her fast are called blessed.


19 The LORD founded the earth by wisdom; He established the heavens by understanding.
20 By His knowledge the deeps were split, and the clouds produce dew.


21 My son, do not let them escape from your sight; keep sound wisdom and discretion,
22 and they will be life to your soul and adornment to your neck.
23 Then you will walk securely on your way, and your foot will not stumble.
24 If you lie down, you will not be afraid; when you lie down, your sleep will be sweet.
25 Do not be afraid of sudden terror or of the storm of the wicked when it comes,
26 for the LORD will be your confidence and will guard your foot from being caught.


27 Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in the power of your hand to do it.
28 Do not say to your neighbor, “Go and come again; tomorrow I will give it”—when you have it with you.
29 Do not plot harm against your neighbor, who dwells trustingly beside you.
30 Do not contend with a man for no reason, if he has done you no harm.
31 Do not envy a violent man, and do not choose any of his ways,
32 for the devious man is an abomination to the LORD, but His secret counsel is with the upright.


33 The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked, but He blesses the dwelling of the righteous.
34 He mocks the mockers, but gives grace to the humble.
35 The wise will inherit honor, but fools display dishonor.




Chapter 4


1 Hear, O sons, the instruction of a father, and pay attention, that you may gain understanding,
2 for I give you good teaching; do not forsake my instruction.


3 When I was a son to my father, tender and the only one in the sight of my mother,
4 he taught me and said to me, “Let your heart hold fast my words; keep my commandments and live.
5 Get wisdom, get understanding; do not forget and do not turn away from the words of my mouth.
6 Do not forsake her, and she will keep you; love her, and she will guard you.


7 The beginning of wisdom is this: Get wisdom, and with all your ability, get understanding.
8 Prize her, and she will exalt you; she will honor you if you embrace her.
9 She will place on your head a garland of grace; she will bestow on you a crown of beauty.”


10 Hear, my son, and receive my words, and the years of your life will be many.
11 I have taught you in the way of wisdom; I have led you in paths of uprightness.
12 When you walk, your step will not be hindered, and if you run, you will not stumble.
13 Hold fast to instruction; do not let go; guard her, for she is your life.


14 Do not enter the path of the wicked, and do not walk in the way of evil men.
15 Avoid it; do not pass by it; turn away from it and pass on.
16 For they cannot sleep unless they have done wrong; they are robbed of sleep unless they make someone stumble.
17 For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of violence.


18 The road the righteous travel is like the light of dawn, shining brighter and brighter until full day.
19 The way of the wicked is like deep darkness; they do not know what they stumble over.


20 My son, pay attention to my words; incline your ear to my sayings.
21 Do not let them depart from your eyes; keep them in the midst of your heart.
22 For they are life to those who find them and healing to all their flesh.


23 Guard your heart with all diligence, for from it flow the springs of life.
24 Put away from yourself crooked speech, and put devious talk far from you.
25 Let your eyes look directly ahead, and let your gaze be straight before you.
26 Make the path of your foot level, and all your ways will be established.
27 Do not turn to the right or to the left; turn your foot away from evil.




Chapter 5


1 My son, pay attention to my wisdom; incline your ear to my understanding,
2 that you may guard discretion and your lips may preserve knowledge.


3 For the lips of the strange woman drip honey, and her speech is smoother than oil,
4 but in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a double-edged sword.
5 Her feet go down to death; her steps lay hold of the grave.
6 She does not ponder the path of life; her ways wander, and she does not know it.


7 Now then, my sons, listen to me, and do not turn away from the words of my mouth.
8 Keep your path far from her, and do not go near the door of her house,
9 lest you give your vigor to others and your years to the cruel one;
10 lest strangers be filled with your strength, and your labors go to the house of a foreigner,
11 and at the end of your life you groan, when your flesh and your body are consumed,
12 and you say, “How I hated discipline, and my heart despised reproof!
13 I did not listen to the voice of my teachers or incline my ear to my instructors.
14 I was almost in utter ruin in the midst of the assembly and congregation.”


15 Drink water from your own cistern, and running water from your own well.
16 Should your springs be scattered abroad, streams of water in the streets?
17 Let them be yours alone and not for strangers with you.
18 Let your fountain be blessed, and rejoice in the wife of your youth,
19 a loving doe, a graceful gazelle—let her breasts satisfy you at all times; be intoxicated always in her love.
20 Why, my son, should you be intoxicated with a strange woman and embrace the bosom of a foreigner?


21 For the ways of a man are before the eyes of the LORD, and He watches all his paths.
22 The iniquities of the wicked will ensnare him, and he will be held fast in the cords of his sin.
23 He will die for lack of discipline, and in the greatness of his folly he will go astray.




Chapter 6


1 My son, if you have become surety for your neighbor, if you have struck your hands in pledge for a stranger,
2 if you are snared by the words of your mouth, caught by the words of your mouth,
3 then do this, my son, and deliver yourself, for you have come into the hand of your neighbor:
Go, humble yourself, and urge your neighbor;
4 give no sleep to your eyes, nor slumber to your eyelids.


5 Deliver yourself like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, and like a bird from the hand of the fowler.
6 Go to the ant, O sluggard; observe her ways and be wise,
7 who, having no chief, officer, or ruler,
8 prepares her food in the summer and gathers her provision in the harvest.
9 How long will you lie down, O sluggard? When will you arise from your sleep?
10 “A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest,”
11 and your poverty will come like a prowler, and your want like an armed man.


12 A worthless person, a wicked man, walks with a perverse mouth,
13 winking with his eyes, speaking with his feet, signaling with his fingers;
14 perversity is in his heart; he continually devises evil; he spreads strife.
15 Therefore his calamity will come suddenly; in a moment he will be broken without remedy.


16 There are six things that the LORD hates, even seven that are an abomination to Him:
17 haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
18 a heart that devises wicked plans, feet that run swiftly to evil,
19 a false witness who breathes out lies, and one who spreads strife among brothers.


20 My son, keep your father’s commandment, and do not forsake your mother’s teaching.
21 Bind them continually on your heart; tie them around your neck.
22 When you walk, it will lead you; when you lie down, it will watch over you; and when you awake, it will speak with you.
23 For the commandment is a lamp, and the teaching a light, and the reproofs of discipline are the way of life,
24 to keep you from the evil woman, from the smooth tongue of the foreign woman.


25 Do not desire her beauty in your heart, and do not let her capture you with her eyelids.
26 For on account of a prostitute one is reduced to a loaf of bread, and a man’s wife hunts down a precious life.
27 Can a man carry fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
28 Or can a man walk on hot coals, and his feet not be scorched?
29 So is he who goes in to his neighbor’s wife; whoever touches her will not go unpunished.


30 People do not despise a thief if he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry;
31 but if he is found, he must repay sevenfold; he must give all the substance of his house.
32 He who commits adultery with a woman lacks sense; he who does it destroys himself.
33 Wounds and dishonor he will get, and his reproach will not be wiped away.
34 For jealousy enrages a man, and he will not spare in the day of vengeance;
35 he will not accept any ransom, nor will he be appeased though you multiply gifts.




Chapter 7


1 My son, hold fast to my words and store up my commands within you.
2 Keep my commands so that you may live, and treasure my teaching like the gem of your eye.
3 Bind them on your fingers; write them on the tablet of your heart.
4 Say to wisdom, “You are my sister,” and call understanding your close companion,
5 to guard you from the adulterous woman, from the seductive stranger with her smooth words.


6 For I looked out through the lattice of my window,
7 and I saw among the naive—I noticed among the young men—a youth lacking sense.
8 He was passing along the street near her corner, walking toward her house,
9 in the twilight, as evening fell, in the dark of night and shadows.
10 Then a woman came toward him, dressed like a prostitute, with a cunning heart.
11 She was loud and defiant; her feet never stayed at home.
12 Now in the street, now in the squares, she lurked at every corner.
13 She grabbed him and kissed him; with a brazen face, she said to him,
14 “I had to offer peace offerings; today I fulfilled my vows.
15 That’s why I came out to meet you, to seek you eagerly—and I’ve found you!
16 I’ve spread my bed with coverings, with colored linens from Egypt.
17 I’ve perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
18 Come, let’s drink deeply of love until morning; let’s delight ourselves with passion.
19 For my husband isn’t home; he’s gone on a long journey.
20 He took a bag of money with him; he won’t return until the full moon.”


21 With her many persuasions, she seduced him; with her smooth talk, she led him astray.
22 He followed her at once, like an ox going to the slaughter, or like a stag caught in a trap,
23 until an arrow pierces its liver—like a bird rushing into a snare, unaware that it will cost him his life.


24 Now, my sons, listen to me; pay attention to the words of my mouth.
25 Don’t let your heart turn aside to her ways; don’t stray into her paths.
26 For she has brought down many victims; her slain are a vast throng.
27 Her house is the road to the grave, descending to the chambers of death.




Chapter 8


1 Does not Wisdom call out, and Understanding raise her voice?  
2 On the heights, beside the road, at the crossroads she takes her stand.  
3 Beside the gates, at the entrance to the city, at the access points she cries aloud:  
4 “To you, O men, I call out, and my voice is to the sons of man.  
5 Understand shrewdness, O simple ones; and you fools, have an understanding heart.  
6 Listen, for I will speak noble things, and the opening of my lips will reveal uprightness.  
7 For my mouth will utter truth; and wickedness is an abomination to my lips.  
8 All the words of my mouth are righteous; none of them are twisted or crooked.  
9 They are all clear to the discerning and right to those who find knowledge.  
10 Receive my instruction and not silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold.  
11 For Wisdom is better than jewels, and all desirable things cannot compare with her.


12 I, Wisdom, dwell with prudence, and I find knowledge and discretion.  
13 The fear of the Lord is hatred of evil. Pride and arrogance and the way of evil and perverse speech I hate.  
14 Counsel and sound wisdom are mine; I am understanding, I have might.  
15 By me kings reign, and rulers decree what is just.  
16 By me princes govern, and nobles—all who judge rightly.  
17 I love those who love me, and those who seek me diligently find me.  
18 Riches and honor are with me, enduring wealth and righteousness.  
19 My fruit is better than gold, even fine gold, and my yield better than choice silver.  
20 I walk in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of justice,  
21 to give wealth to those who love me and to fill their treasuries.


22 The Lord created me at the beginning of His way, before His deeds of old.  
23 From everlasting I was established, from the beginning, from before the earth began.  
24 When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no springs abounding with water.  
25 Before the mountains were settled, before the hills, I was brought forth—  
26 before He made the earth and its fields, or the first dust of the world.  
27 When He established the heavens, I was there; when He inscribed a circle on the face of the deep;  
28 when He made firm the skies above; when the fountains of the deep surged forth;  
29 when He set limits for the sea so the waters would not transgress His command; when He marked out the foundations of the earth—  
30 then I was beside Him, like a master craftsman, and I was His delight day by day, rejoicing always before Him,  
31 rejoicing in the inhabited world, and delighting in the sons of man.


32 So now, sons, listen to me: blessed are those who keep my ways.  
33 Hear instruction and be wise, and do not neglect it.  
34 Blessed is the man who listens to me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.  
35 For whoever finds me finds life and obtains favor from the Lord.  
36 But he who sins against me injures his own soul; all who hate me love death.




Chapter 9


1 Wisdom has built her house; she has hewn out her seven pillars.  
2 She has slaughtered her beasts, she has mixed her wine; she has also set her table.  
3 She has sent out her maidens; she calls from the heights of the city,  
4 “Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” To him who lacks sense she says,  
5 “Come, eat of my bread and drink of the wine I have mixed.  
6 Leave your simple ways, and live, and walk in the way of insight.”


7 He who corrects a scoffer gets abuse for himself, and he who reproves a wicked man incurs injury.  
8 Do not reprove a scoffer, lest he hate you; reprove a wise man, and he will love you.  
9 Give instruction to a wise man, and he will become still wiser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning.


10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy One is understanding.  
11 For by me your days will be multiplied, and years of life will be added to you.  
12 If you are wise, you are wise for yourself; but if you scoff, you alone will bear it.


13 The woman Folly is loud; she is seductive and knows nothing.  
14 She sits at the door of her house, she takes a seat on the high places of the city,  
15 calling to those who pass by, who go straight on their way,  
16 “Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” And to him who lacks sense she says,  
17 “Stolen water is sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.”  
18 But he does not know that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of the grave.




Chapter 10


1 The proverbs of Solomon: A wise son makes a glad father,  
but a foolish son is a sorrow to his mother.
2 Treasures gained by wickedness do not profit,  
but righteousness delivers from death.
3 The LORD does not let the righteous go hungry,  
but He thwarts the craving of the wicked.
4 A slack hand causes poverty,  
but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
5 He who gathers in summer is a prudent son,  
but he who sleeps in harvest is a son who brings shame.
6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous,  
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
7 The memory of the righteous is a blessing,  
but the name of the wicked will rot.
8 The wise of heart will receive commandments,  
but a babbling fool will come to ruin.
9 Whoever walks in integrity walks securely,  
but whoever takes crooked paths will be found out.
10 Whoever winks the eye causes trouble,  
and a babbling fool will come to ruin.
11 The mouth of the righteous is a fountain of life,  
but the mouth of the wicked conceals violence.
12 Hatred stirs up strife,  
but love covers all offenses.
13 On the lips of him who has understanding, wisdom is found,  
but a rod is for the back of him who lacks sense.
14 The wise lay up knowledge,  
but the mouth of a fool brings ruin near.
15 The rich man’s wealth is his strong city;  
the poverty of the poor is their ruin.
16 The wage of the righteous leads to life,  
the gain of the wicked to sin.
17 Whoever heeds instruction is on the path to life,  
but he who rejects reproof leads others astray.
18 The one who conceals hatred has lying lips,  
and whoever utters slander is a fool.
19 When words are many, transgression is not lacking,  
but whoever restrains his lips is prudent.
20 The tongue of the righteous is choice silver;  
the heart of the wicked is of little worth.
21 The lips of the righteous feed many,  
but fools die for lack of sense.
22 The blessing of the LORD makes rich,  
and He adds no sorrow with it.
23 Doing wrong is like a joke to a fool,  
but wisdom is pleasure to a man of understanding.
24 What the wicked dreads will come upon him,  
but the desire of the righteous will be granted.
25 When the tempest passes, the wicked is no more,  
but the righteous is established forever.
26 Like vinegar to the teeth and smoke to the eyes,  
so is the sluggard to those who send him.
27 The fear of the LORD prolongs life,  
but the years of the wicked will be short.
28 The hope of the righteous ends in gladness,  
but the expectation of the wicked comes to nothing.
29 The way of the LORD is a stronghold to the upright,  
but destruction to evildoers.
30 The righteous will never be removed,  
but the wicked will not dwell in the land.
31 The mouth of the righteous brings forth wisdom,  
but the perverse tongue will be cut off.
32 The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable,  
but the mouth of the wicked, what is perverse.




Chapter 11


1 A false balance is an abomination to the LORD,
 but a just weight is His delight.
2 When pride comes, then comes disgrace,
 but with the humble is wisdom.
3 The integrity of the upright guides them,
 but the crookedness of the treacherous destroys them.


4 Riches do not profit in the day of wrath,
 but righteousness delivers from death.
5 The righteousness of the blameless makes his way straight,
 but the wicked falls by his own wickedness.
6 The righteousness of the upright delivers them,
 but the treacherous are taken captive by their lust.


7 When the wicked dies, his hope perishes,
 and the expectation of strength perishes too.
8 The righteous is delivered from trouble,
 and the wicked takes his place.
9 With his mouth the godless man destroys his neighbor,
 but by knowledge the righteous are delivered.


10 When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices,
 and when the wicked perish, there is jubilation.
11 By the blessing of the upright a city is exalted,
 but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
12 Whoever belittles his neighbor lacks sense,
 but a man of understanding remains silent.


13 He who goes about as a talebearer reveals secrets,
 but he who is trustworthy in spirit keeps a matter hidden.
14 Where there is no guidance, a people falls,
 but in an abundance of counselors there is deliverance.
15 Whoever is surety for a stranger will surely suffer harm,
 but he who hates striking hands in pledge is secure.


16 A gracious woman obtains honor,
 and violent men obtain riches.
17 A man who is kind benefits himself,
 but a cruel man brings trouble on his own flesh.
18 The wicked earns deceptive wages,
 but one who sows righteousness gets a true reward.


19 Whoever is steadfast in righteousness will live,
 but he who pursues evil will bring about his own death.
20 Those of crooked heart are an abomination to the LORD,
 but those of blameless ways are His delight.
21 Be assured, the evil man will not go unpunished,
 but the descendents of the righteous will be delivered.


22 Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout
 is a beautiful woman without discretion.
23 The desire of the righteous ends only in good,
 but the expectation of the wicked is wrath.
24 One gives freely, yet grows all the richer;
 another withholds what is right, and only suffers want.


25 A generous soul will be enriched,
 and he who waters will himself be watered.
26 The people curse him who holds back grain,
 but blessing is on the head of him who sells it.
27 He who diligently seeks good seeks favor,
 but evil comes to him who searches for it.


28 He who trusts in his riches will fall,
 but the righteous will flourish like a green leaf.
29 Whoever troubles his own household will inherit the wind,
 and the fool will be servant to the wise of heart.
30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life,
 and he who wins souls is wise.
31 If the righteous is repaid on earth,
 how much more the wicked and the sinner!




Chapter 12


1 Whoever loves discipline loves knowledge,
but he who hates reproof is stupid.
2 A good man obtains favor from the LORD,
but a man of wicked devices he condemns.
3 A man is not established by wickedness,
but the root of the righteous will not be moved.
4 A virtuous wife is the crown of her husband,
but she who brings shame is like rottenness in his bones.
5 The thoughts of the righteous are just,
but the counsels of the wicked are deceitful.
6 The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood,
but the mouth of the upright delivers them.
7 The wicked are overthrown and are no more,
but the house of the righteous will stand.
8 A man is praised according to his insight,
but one with a perverse heart will be despised.
9 Better is a man who is lightly esteemed and has a servant
than one who honors himself and lacks bread.
10 A righteous man regards the life of his animal,
but the compassion of the wicked is cruel.
11 He who tills his land will have plenty of bread,
but he who follows worthless pursuits lacks sense.
12 The wicked covets the plunder of evildoers,
but the root of the righteous yields fruit.
13 In the transgression of the lips there is a snare for the evil man,
but the righteous will escape from trouble.
14 From the fruit of a man’s mouth he is satisfied with good,
and the work of a man’s hands returns to him.
15 The way of a fool is right in his own eyes,
but a wise man listens to counsel.
16 A fool’s vexation is known at once,
but a prudent man overlooks an insult.
17 He who speaks truth declares righteousness,
but a false witness deceit.
18 There is one whose rash words are like sword thrusts,
but the tongue of the wise brings healing.
19 Truthful lips endure forever,
but a lying tongue lasts but a moment.
20 Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil,
but those who plan peace have joy.
21 No harm befalls the righteous,
but the wicked are filled with trouble.
22 Lying lips are an abomination to the LORD,
but those who act faithfully are his delight.
23 A prudent man conceals knowledge,
but the heart of fools proclaims folly.
24 The hand of the diligent will rule,
but the slothful will be put to forced labor.
25 Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down,
but a good word makes it glad.
26 The righteous chooses his friends carefully,
but the way of the wicked leads them astray.
27 The slothful man does not roast his prey,
but the possessions of the diligent are precious.
28 In the path of righteousness is life,
and in its pathway there is no death.




Chapter 13


1 A wise son accepts his father’s discipline,
but a scoffer does not listen to rebuke.
2 From the fruit of a man’s mouth he eats what is good,
but the appetite of the treacherous is for violence.
3 He who guards his mouth preserves his life,
but he who opens wide his lips comes to ruin.


4 The soul of the sluggard craves and gets nothing,
but the soul of the diligent is richly supplied.
5 A righteous man hates falsehood,
but a wicked man brings shame and disgrace.
6 Righteousness guards the way of the blameless,
but wickedness overthrows the sinner.


7 One pretends to be rich, yet has nothing;
another pretends to be poor, yet has great wealth.
8 The ransom of a man’s life is his wealth,
but a poor man hears no threat.
9 The light of the righteous rejoices,
but the lamp of the wicked goes out.


10 By pride comes only strife,
but with the humble is wisdom.
11 Wealth gained hastily will dwindle,
but he who gathers little by little will increase it.
12 Hope deferred makes the heart sick,
but a desire fulfilled is a tree of life.


13 He who despises the word brings destruction on himself,
but he who respects the commandments will be rewarded.
14 The teaching of the wise is a fountain of life,
to turn one away from the snares of death.
15 Good sense wins favor,
but the way of the treacherous is their ruin.


16 Every prudent man acts with knowledge,
but a fool flaunts his folly.
17 A wicked messenger falls into trouble,
but a faithful envoy brings healing.
18 Poverty and shame come to him who ignores instruction,
but he who regards reproof will be honored.


19 A desire fulfilled is sweet to the soul,
but to turn away from evil is an abomination to fools.
20 He who walks with the wise becomes wise,
but a companion of fools will suffer harm.
21 Misfortune pursues sinners,
but the righteous are rewarded with good.


22 A good man leaves an inheritance to his children’s children,
but the sinner’s wealth is laid up for the righteous.
23 The fallow ground of the poor yields much food,
but it is swept away through injustice.
24 He who spares the rod hates his son,
but he who loves him is diligent to discipline him.
25 The righteous eats to the satisfaction of his soul,
but the belly of the wicked will lack.




Chapter 14


1 A wise woman builds her house,
but the foolish tears it down with her own hands.
2 He who walks in uprightness fears the LORD,
but he who is devious in his ways despises Him.
3 In the mouth of a fool is a rod for his back,
but the lips of the wise protect them.
4 Where there are no oxen, the manger is clean,
but abundant harvest comes by the strength of the ox.
5 A faithful witness does not lie,
but a false witness breathes out lies.
6 A scoffer seeks wisdom and finds none,
but knowledge comes easily to one who understands.
7 Leave the presence of a foolish man,
for there you do not find lips of knowledge.
8 The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way,
but the folly of fools is deceit.
9 Fools mock guilt,
but among the upright there is goodwill.
10 The heart knows its own bitterness,
and no stranger shares in its joy.
11 The house of the wicked will be destroyed,
but the tent of the upright will flourish.
12 There is a way that seems right to a man,
but its end is the way of death.
13 Even in laughter the heart may ache,
and the end of joy may be sorrow.
14 The backslider in heart will be filled with his own ways,
but a good man will be satisfied from above.
15 The simple believes every word,
but the prudent gives thought to his steps.
16 A wise man fears and turns away from evil,
but the fool is arrogant and careless.
17 A quick-tempered man acts foolishly,
and a man of evil devices is hated.
18 The simple inherit folly,
but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
19 The evil bow down before the good,
and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
20 The poor is hated even by his neighbor,
but the rich has many friends.
21 He who despises his neighbor sins,
but he who shows kindness to the afflicted is blessed.
22 Do they not go astray who devise evil?
But lovingkindness and truth belong to those who plan good.
23 In all labor there is profit,
but mere talk leads only to poverty.
24 The crown of the wise is their riches,
but the folly of fools is only folly.
25 A truthful witness saves lives,
but one who breathes lies is deceitful.
26 In the fear of the LORD there is strong confidence,
and his children will have a refuge.
27 The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life,
to turn away from the snares of death.
28 In a multitude of people is the king's glory,
but in the lack of people is the downfall of a prince.
29 He who is slow to anger has great understanding,
but he who is quick-tempered exalts folly.
30 A tranquil heart is life to the body,
but envy is rottenness to the bones.
31 He who oppresses the poor reproaches his Maker,
but he who honors Him shows kindness to the needy.
32 The wicked is overthrown by his own wrongdoing,
but the righteous has a refuge in his death.
33 Wisdom rests in the heart of him who has understanding,
but what is in the inner parts of fools is made known.
34 Righteousness exalts a nation,
but sin is a reproach to any people.
35 The king’s favor is toward a wise servant,
but his wrath is against him who causes shame.




Chapter 15


1 A soft answer turns away wrath,
but a harsh word stirs up anger.
2 The tongue of the wise makes knowledge attractive,
but the mouth of fools pours out folly.
3 The eyes of the LORD are in every place,
watching the evil and the good.


4 A healing tongue is a tree of life,
but perverseness in it breaks the spirit.
5 A fool despises his father's discipline,
but he who heeds correction is prudent.
6 In the house of the righteous there is much treasure,
but in the income of the wicked is trouble.


7 The lips of the wise spread knowledge,
but the hearts of fools are not upright.
8 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
9 The way of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,
but he loves one who pursues righteousness.


10 Severe discipline is for him who forsakes the path,
and he who hates correction will die.
11 The grave and destruction lie open before the LORD,
how much more the hearts of the sons of man!
12 A scoffer does not love one who corrects him;
he will not go to the wise.


13 A glad heart makes a cheerful face,
but by sorrow of heart the spirit is crushed.
14 The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge,
but the mouth of fools feeds on folly.


15 All the days of the afflicted are evil,
but a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
16 Better is a little with the fear of the LORD
than great treasure with turmoil.
17 Better is a dish of vegetables where love is
than a fattened ox with hatred.


18 A hot-tempered man stirs up strife,
but he who is slow to anger quiets contention.
19 The way of the sluggard is like a hedge of thorns,
but the path of the upright is a highway.


20 A wise son makes a glad father,
but a foolish man despises his mother.
21 Folly is a joy to one who lacks sense,
but a man of understanding walks straight.


22 Without counsel plans fail,
but with many advisers they succeed.
23 A man has joy in an apt answer,
and how good is a word in its season!


24 The path of life leads upward for the wise,
that he may turn away from the grave below.
25 The LORD will tear down the house of the proud,
but he will establish the boundary of the widow.


26 Evil plans are an abomination to the LORD,
but gracious words are pure.
27 He who is greedy for gain troubles his own house,
but he who hates bribes will live.


28 The heart of the righteous ponders how to answer,
but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things.
29 The LORD is far from the wicked,
but he hears the prayer of the righteous.


30 Bright eyes gladden the heart,
and good news strengthens the bones.
31 The ear that listens to life-giving reproof
will dwell among the wise.
32 He who ignores discipline despises himself,
but he who listens to correction gains understanding.


33 The fear of the LORD is instruction in wisdom,
and humility comes before honor.




Chapter 16


1 The plans of the heart belong to man,
but the answer of the tongue is from the LORD.
2 All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes,
but the LORD weighs the spirit.
3 Commit your works to the LORD,
and your plans will be established.


4 The LORD has made everything for its purpose,
even the wicked for the day of trouble.
5 Everyone who is arrogant in heart is an abomination to the LORD;
be assured, he will not go unpunished.
6 By loyal love and truth is iniquity atoned for,
and by the fear of the LORD one turns away from evil.
7 When a man's ways please the LORD,
he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
8 Better is a little with righteousness
than great revenues with injustice.


9 The heart of man plans his way,
but the LORD establishes his steps.
10 A divine verdict is on the lips of a king;
his mouth must not be unfaithful in judgment.
11 Honest scales and balances belong to the LORD;
all the weights in the bag are his work.
12 It is an abomination for kings to do evil,
for the throne is made secure by righteousness.
13 Righteous lips are the delight of kings,
and he who speaks uprightly is loved.
14 The wrath of a king is a messenger of death,
but a wise man will appease it.
15 In the light of the king’s face there is life,
and his favor is like a cloud of the spring rain.


16 How much better to get wisdom than gold,
and to choose understanding rather than silver!
17 The highway of the upright turns aside from evil;
he who guards his way preserves his soul.
18 Pride goes before destruction,
and a haughty spirit before a fall.
19 Better to be of a humble spirit with the lowly
than to divide the spoil with the proud.


20 He who gives attention to the word will find good,
and blessed is he who trusts in the LORD.
21 The wise in heart will be called discerning,
and sweetness of speech increases learning.
22 Understanding is a fountain of life to one who has it,
but the discipline of fools is folly.
23 The heart of the wise makes his mouth prudent,
and adds learning to his lips.
24 Pleasant words are a honeycomb,
sweet to the soul and healing to the bones.


25 There is a way that seems right to a man,
but its end is the way of death.
26 A worker’s appetite works for him,
for his hunger urges him on.
27 A worthless man plots evil,
and his speech is like a scorching fire.
28 A perverse man spreads strife,
and a whisperer separates close friends.


29 A man of violence entices his neighbor
and leads him in a way that is not good.
30 He who winks his eyes devises perverse things;
he who purses his lips brings evil to pass.
31 Gray hair is a crown of glory;
it is gained in the way of righteousness.
32 He who is slow to anger is better than the mighty,
and he who rules his spirit than he who takes a city.
33 The lot is cast into the lap,
but every decision is from the LORD.




Chapter 17


1 Better a dry morsel with quiet
than a house full of feasting with strife.
2 A servant who acts wisely will rule over a disgraceful son,
and will share in the inheritance among brothers.
3 The crucible is for silver and the furnace for gold,
but the LORD tests hearts.
4 An evildoer listens to wicked lips,
a liar pays attention to a destructive tongue.
5 He who mocks the poor insults his Maker;
he who rejoices at calamity will not go unpunished.
6 Grandchildren are the crown of old men,
and the glory of children is their fathers.
7 Fine speech is not fitting for a fool—
much less lying lips for a ruler.
8 A bribe is like a charm in the eyes of its giver;
wherever he turns, he succeeds.
9 He who covers an offense promotes love,
but he who repeats a matter separates close friends.
10 A rebuke sinks deeper into a discerning man
than a hundred blows into a fool.
11 An evil man seeks only rebellion,
and a cruel messenger will be sent against him.
12 Better to meet a bear robbed of her cubs
than a fool in his folly.
13 He who returns evil for good—
evil will not depart from his house.
14 The beginning of strife is like letting out water,
so abandon the quarrel before it breaks out.
15 He who justifies the wicked and he who condemns the righteous—
both are an abomination to the LORD.
16 Why should a fool have money in his hand to buy wisdom,
when he has no heart for it?
17 A friend loves at all times,
and a brother is born for adversity.
18 A man lacking sense strikes hands in pledge
and puts up security for his neighbor.
19 He who loves transgression loves strife;
he who builds a high gate seeks destruction.
20 A crooked heart finds no good,
and a perverse tongue falls into trouble.
21 He who begets a fool does so to his sorrow,
and the father of a fool has no joy.
22 A joyful heart is good medicine,
but a crushed spirit dries up the bones.
23 A wicked man takes a bribe in secret
to pervert the paths of justice.
24 Wisdom is before the face of the discerning,
but the eyes of a fool are on the ends of the earth.
25 A foolish son is grief to his father
and bitterness to her who bore him.
26 It is not good to punish the righteous,
nor to strike nobles for their integrity.
27 He who restrains his words has knowledge,
and he who has a cool spirit is a man of understanding.
28 Even a fool, when he keeps silent, is considered wise;
when he shuts his lips, he is deemed intelligent.




Chapter 18


1 He who isolates himself seeks his own desire;
he breaks out against all sound judgment.
2 A fool takes no pleasure in understanding,
but only in expressing his own opinion.
3 When wickedness comes, contempt also comes,
and with dishonor comes disgrace.
4 The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters;
the fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook.
5 It is not good to be partial to the wicked
or to deprive the righteous of justice.
6 A fool’s lips bring strife,
and his mouth invites a beating.
7 A fool’s mouth is his ruin,
and his lips are a snare to his soul.
8 The words of a whisperer are like tasty morsels;
they go down into the innermost parts of the body.
9 Whoever is slack in his work
is a brother to him who destroys.
10 The name of the LORD is a strong tower;
the righteous man runs into it and is safe.
11 A rich man’s wealth is his strong city,
and like a high wall in his own imagination.
12 Before destruction a man’s heart is haughty,
but humility comes before honor.
13 If one gives an answer before he hears,
it is his folly and shame.
14 A man’s spirit will endure sickness,
but a crushed spirit who can bear?
15 The heart of the discerning acquires knowledge,
and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.
16 A man’s gift makes room for him
and brings him before the great.
17 The first to plead his case seems right,
until another comes and examines him.
18 The lot puts an end to disputes
and decides between powerful contenders.
19 A brother offended is more unyielding than a strong city,
and quarreling is like the bars of a fortress.
20 From the fruit of a man’s mouth his stomach is satisfied;
he is satisfied by the yield of his lips.
21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue,
and those who love it will eat its fruit.
22 He who finds a wife finds a good thing
and obtains favor from the LORD.
23 The poor man speaks with entreaties,
but the rich man answers roughly.
24 A man of many companions may come to ruin,
but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.




Chapter 19


1 Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity
than one who is perverse in his lips and is a fool.
2 Also, it is not good for a soul to be without knowledge,
and he who hurries with his feet misses the way.
3 A man’s own folly subverts his way,
yet his heart rages against the LORD.
4 Wealth adds many friends,
but the poor man is separated from his friend.
5 A false witness will not go unpunished,
and he who breathes lies will not escape.
6 Many seek the favor of a nobleman,
and every man is a friend to him who gives gifts.
7 All the brothers of a poor man hate him;
how much more do his friends keep far from him!
He pursues them with words, but they are gone.
8 He who gets wisdom loves his own soul;
he who keeps understanding will find good.
9 A false witness will not go unpunished,
and he who breathes lies will perish.
10 Luxury is not fitting for a fool,
much less for a slave to rule over princes.
11 A man’s discretion makes him slow to anger,
and it is his glory to overlook an offense.
12 The king’s wrath is like the roaring of a lion,
but his favor is like dew upon the grass.
13 A foolish son is the calamity of his father,
and a contentious wife is like a constant dripping.
14 House and wealth are an inheritance from fathers,
but a prudent wife is from the LORD.
15 Laziness casts into a deep sleep,
and the idle soul will suffer hunger.
16 He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul;
he who despises his ways will die.
17 He who shows kindness to the poor lends to the LORD,
and He will repay him for his deed.
18 Discipline your son while there is hope,
but do not set your heart on causing his death.
19 A man of great wrath will bear the penalty;
for if you rescue him, you will have to do it again.
20 Listen to counsel and receive instruction,
that you may be wise in your latter days.
21 Many are the plans in a man’s heart,
but the counsel of the LORD will stand.
22 The charm of a man is his kindness,
and it is better to be poor than a liar.
23 The fear of the LORD leads to life;
then one rests satisfied, untouched by evil.
24 The sluggard buries his hand in the dish,
and will not even bring it back to his mouth.
25 Strike a scoffer, and the simple will become prudent;
reprove one who has understanding, and he will gain knowledge.
26 He who plunders his father and drives away his mother
is a son who causes shame and brings reproach.
27 Cease, my son, to hear instruction
that causes you to stray from the words of knowledge.
28 A worthless witness mocks at justice,
and the mouth of the wicked swallows iniquity.
29 Judgments are prepared for scoffers,
and blows for the backs of fools.




Chapter 20


1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler,
and whoever is led astray by it is not wise.
2 The terror of a king is like the growl of a lion;
whoever provokes him to anger sins against his own life.
3 It is an honor for a man to avoid strife,
but every fool is quick to quarrel.
4 The sluggard does not plow in autumn;
he will seek at harvest and have nothing.
5 The purpose in a man’s heart is like deep water,
but a man of understanding will draw it out.
6 Many a man proclaims his own steadfast love,
but a faithful man who can find?
7 The righteous man walks in his integrity;
blessed are his children after him.
8 A king who sits on the throne of judgment
winnows all evil with his eyes.
9 Who can say, “I have made my heart pure;
I am clean from my sin”?
10 Unequal weights and unequal measures
are both alike an abomination to the LORD.
11 Even a child makes himself known by his deeds,
whether his conduct is pure and right.
12 The hearing ear and the seeing eye,
the LORD has made them both.
13 Do not love sleep, lest you come to poverty;
open your eyes, and you will have plenty of bread.
14 “Bad, bad,” says the buyer;
but when he goes his way, then he boasts.
15 There is gold, and an abundance of jewels,
but the lips of knowledge are a precious vessel.
16 Take a man’s garment when he has put up security for a stranger,
and hold it in pledge when it is for foreigners.
17 Bread gained by deceit is sweet to a man,
but afterward his mouth will be full of gravel.
18 Plans are established by counsel;
by wise guidance wage war.
19 He who goes about as a slanderer reveals secrets;
therefore do not associate with one who opens his lips.
20 Whoever curses his father or his mother,
his lamp will be put out in utter darkness.
21 An inheritance gained hastily in the beginning
will not be blessed in the end.
22 Do not say, “I will repay evil”;
wait for the LORD, and He will save you.
23 Unequal weights are an abomination to the LORD,
and false scales are not good.
24 A man’s steps are from the LORD;
how then can man understand his way?
25 It is a snare to say rashly, “It is holy,”
and to reflect only after making vows.
26 A wise king winnows the wicked
and drives the wheel over them.
27 The spirit of man is the lamp of the LORD,
searching all the innermost parts.
28 Steadfast love and faithfulness preserve the king,
and by steadfast love his throne is upheld.
29 The glory of young men is their strength,
but the splendor of old men is their gray hair.
30 Blows that wound cleanse away evil;
strokes make clean the innermost parts.




Chapter 21


1 The king’s heart is a stream of water in the hand of the LORD;
He turns it wherever He will.
2 Every way of a man is right in his own eyes,
but the LORD weighs the hearts.
3 To do righteousness and justice
is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice.
4 Haughty eyes and a proud heart—
the lamp of the wicked—is sin.
5 The plans of the diligent surely lead to abundance,
but everyone who is hasty comes only to poverty.
6 The getting of treasures by a lying tongue
is a fleeting vapor, a snare of death.
7 The violence of the wicked will sweep them away,
because they refuse to do what is just.
8 The way of a guilty man is crooked,
but the conduct of the pure is upright.
9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop
than in a house shared with a quarrelsome wife.
10 The soul of the wicked desires evil;
his neighbor finds no mercy in his eyes.
11 When a scoffer is punished, the simple become wise;
when the wise is instructed, he gains knowledge.
12 The Righteous One observes the house of the wicked;
He brings the wicked to ruin.
13 Whoever shuts his ear to the cry of the poor
will himself call and not be answered.
14 A gift in secret averts anger,
and a bribe in the bosom, strong wrath.
15 It is a joy to the righteous to do justice,
but terror to evildoers.
16 The man who wanders from the way of understanding
will rest in the assembly of the dead.
17 He who loves pleasure will be a poor man;
he who loves wine and oil will not be rich.
18 The wicked is a ransom for the righteous,
and the treacherous for the upright.
19 It is better to dwell in a desert land
than with a quarrelsome and fretful woman.
20 Precious treasure and oil are in the dwelling of the wise,
but a foolish man devours it.
21 He who pursues righteousness and steadfast love
will find life, righteousness, and honor.
22 A wise man scales the city of the mighty
and brings down the stronghold in which they trust.
23 Whoever guards his mouth and his tongue
keeps himself out of trouble.
24 “Scoffer” is the name of the arrogant, haughty man
who acts with arrogant pride.
25 The desire of the sluggard kills him,
for his hands refuse to labor.
26 All day long he craves and craves,
but the righteous gives and does not hold back.
27 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination—
how much more when he brings it with evil intent.
28 A false witness will perish,
but the man who listens will speak with knowledge.
29 A wicked man puts on a bold face,
but the upright gives thought to his ways.
30 No wisdom, no understanding, no counsel
can avail against the LORD.
31 The horse is made ready for the day of battle,
but the victory belongs to the LORD.




Chapter 22


1 A good name is to be chosen rather than great wealth,
and favor is better than silver and gold.
2 The rich and the poor meet together;
the LORD is the Maker of them all.
3 The prudent sees danger and hides himself,
but the simple go on and suffer for it.
4 The reward for humility and the fear of the LORD
is riches and honor and life.
5 Thorns and snares are in the path of the crooked;
whoever guards his soul will keep far from them.
6 Train up a child in the way he should go;
even when he is old he will not turn from it.
7 The rich rules over the poor,
and the borrower is servant to the lender.
8 Whoever sows injustice will reap trouble,
and the rod of his fury will fail.
9 He who has a generous eye will be blessed,
for he shares his bread with the poor.
10 Drive out the scoffer, and strife will go out;
quarreling and abuse will cease.
11 He who loves purity of heart,
and whose speech is gracious, will have the king as his friend.
12 The eyes of the LORD keep watch over knowledge,
but He overthrows the words of the treacherous.
13 The sluggard says, “There is a lion outside!
I shall be killed in the streets!”
14 The mouth of forbidden women is a deep pit;
he with whom the LORD is angry will fall into it.
15 Folly is bound up in the heart of a child,
but the rod of discipline drives it far from him.
16 Whoever oppresses the poor to increase his own wealth,
or gives to the rich, will only come to poverty.
17 Incline your ear, and hear the words of the wise,
and apply your heart to my knowledge.
18 For it will be pleasant if you keep them within you,
if all of them are ready on your lips.
19 That your trust may be in the LORD,
I make them known to you today, even to you.
20 Have I not written for you thirty sayings
of counsel and knowledge,
21 to make you know what is right and true,
that you may give a true answer to those who send you?
22 Do not rob the poor, because he is poor,
or crush the afflicted at the gate;
23 for the LORD will plead their cause
and rob of life those who rob them.
24 Make no friendship with a man given to anger,
nor go with a wrathful man,
25 lest you learn his ways
and entangle yourself in a snare.
26 Be not one of those who give pledges,
who put up security for debts.
27 If you have nothing with which to pay,
why should your bed be taken from under you?
28 Do not move the ancient landmark
that your fathers have set.
29 Do you see a man skillful in his work?
He will stand before kings;
he will not stand before obscure men.




Chapter 23


1 When you sit to eat with a ruler, consider carefully what is before you,
2 and put a knife to your throat if you are a man given to appetite.
3 Do not crave his delicacies, for they are deceptive food.


4 Do not toil to become rich; cease from your own understanding.
5 When your eyes look on it, it is gone, for riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away like an eagle toward heaven.


6 Do not eat the bread of a stingy man, nor desire his delicacies,
7 for as he calculates within himself, so he is. “Eat and drink,” he says to you, but his heart is not with you.
8 You will vomit the morsel you have eaten and waste your pleasant words.


9 Do not speak in the hearing of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of your words.


10 Do not move the ancient boundary, and do not enter the fields of the fatherless,
11 for their Redeemer is strong; He will plead their cause against you.


12 Apply your heart to instruction and your ears to words of knowledge.


13 Do not withhold discipline from a child; if you strike him with the rod, he will not die.
14 You shall strike him with the rod and deliver his life from the grave.


15 My son, if your heart is wise, my heart too will rejoice;
16 my inmost being will exult when your lips speak what is right.


17 Do not let your heart envy sinners, but live in the fear of the LORD all day long.
18 For surely there is a future, and your hope will not be cut off.


19 Hear, my son, and be wise, and direct your heart in the way.
20 Do not be among heavy drinkers of wine or among gluttonous eaters of meat,
21 for the drunkard and the glutton will come to poverty, and drowsiness will clothe one with rags.


22 Listen to your father who begot you, and do not despise your mother when she is old.
23 Buy truth and do not sell it—wisdom and instruction and understanding.


24 The father of the righteous will greatly rejoice; he who fathers a wise son will delight in him.
25 Let your father and your mother be glad; let her who bore you rejoice.


26 My son, give me your heart, and let your eyes delight in my ways.
27 For a prostitute is a deep pit, and a wayward woman is a narrow well.
28 She lies in wait like a robber and increases the faithless among men.


29 Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has strife? Who has complaining? Who has wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes?
30 Those who linger long over wine, those who go to seek mixed wine.
31 Do not look at wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly.
32 In the end it bites like a serpent and stings like a viper.
33 Your eyes will see strange things, and your heart will utter perverse things.
34 You will be like one lying down in the midst of the sea, or like one lying on the top of a mast.
35 “They struck me,” you will say, “but I was not hurt; they beat me, but I did not feel it. When shall I awake? I will seek it again.”


***
Chapter 24


1 Do not envy men of evil, nor desire to be with them;
2 for violence is in their heart, and their lips speak of trouble.
3 By wisdom a house is built, and by understanding it is established;
4 and by knowledge its rooms are filled with all precious and pleasant wealth.
5 A wise man is strong; and a man of knowledge increases power.
6 For by wise counsel you wage your war, and in the multitude of advisers there is safety.
7 Wisdom is as precious stones to a fool; in the gate he will not open his mouth.
8 He who devises evil is called a man of schemes.
9 The devising of foolishness is sin, and the scorner is an abomination to man.
10 If you faint in the day of adversity, your strength is small indeed.
11 Rescue those being led away to death; and those staggering to be slain, hold back.
12 For if you say, “We did not know this,” does He not weigh the hearts? And He who guards your soul knows; and He will repay man according to his work.
13 Eat honey, my son, for it is good; and the honeycomb is sweet to your taste.
14 So know wisdom for your soul; if you have found it, then there is a future, and your hope will not be cut off.


15 Do not lurk, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous; do not plunder his resting-place.
16 For a righteous man may fall seven times, and rise again; but the wicked stumble in calamity.
17 Do not rejoice when your enemy falls, and do not let your heart be glad when he stumbles,
18 lest the LORD see, and it displease Him, and He turn His wrath away from him.


19 Do not fret because of evildoers, and do not envy the wicked;
20 for there will be no future for evil men; the lamp of the wicked will be put out.
21 My son, fear the LORD and the king; do not mingle with those given to change.
22 For their calamity will rise suddenly, and who knows the disaster of both of them?


23 These also are sayings of the wise: to show partiality in judgment is not good.
24 He who says to the wicked, “You are righteous”—peoples will curse him, nations will be angry with him.
25 But to those who correct him there will be delight; and a good blessing will come upon them.
26 Let lips kiss him who gives a right answer.


27 Prepare your work outside, and make it ready in the field for yourself; then afterwards build your house.
28 Be not a witness against your neighbor without cause; and do not deceive with your lips.
29 Do not say, “As he did to me, so will I do to him; I will repay the man according to his work.”


30 I passed by the field of a lazy man, and by the vineyard of a man without sense;
31 and lo, it was all overgrown with thorns; its surface was covered with nettles, and its stone wall was broken down.
32 Then I looked, and considered; I saw, and received instruction.
33 A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to rest;
34 and poverty will come on you like a robber, and want like an armed man.




Chapter 25


1 These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied.


2 It is the glory of God to conceal a matter,
 and the glory of kings to search a matter out.
3 The heavens for height, and the earth for depth,
 and the heart of kings is unsearchable.
4 Remove dross from silver,
 and a vessel comes forth for the smith.
5 Remove the wicked from before the king,
 and his throne will be established in righteousness.
6 Do not exalt yourself in the presence of the king,
 and do not stand in the place of great men;
7 for it is better that it be said to you, “Come up here,”
 than that you be brought low before a noble.


8 Do not go out hastily to contend,
 lest you do not know what to do in the end
 when your neighbor humiliates you.
9 Argue your case with your neighbor,
 but do not reveal another man’s secret,
10 lest he who hears shame you,
 and your bad report never turn away.


11 A word fitly spoken
 is like apples of gold in settings of silver.
12 Like a ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold,
 is a wise reprover to an obedient ear.
13 Like the cold of snow in harvest
 is a faithful messenger to those who send him,
 for he restores the life of his masters.
14 A man who boasts of a gift he does not give
 is like clouds and wind without rain.


15 By patience a ruler may be persuaded,
 and a soft tongue breaks a bone.
16 If you find honey, eat only what is enough for you,
 lest you be filled with it and vomit it.
17 Let your foot be seldom in your neighbor’s house,
 lest he be weary of you and hate you.


18 A man who bears false witness against his neighbor
 is a club, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.
19 Trust in an unfaithful man in time of trouble
 is a broken tooth and a slipping foot.
20 One who removes a garment in cold weather,
 and vinegar on soda,
 is he who sings songs to a heavy heart.


21 If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat;
 and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink;
22 for you will heap coals on his head,
 and the LORD will reward you.


23 The north wind brings forth rain,
 and a backbiting tongue an angry face.
24 It is better to live on the corner of a roof
 than with a quarrelsome woman in a house together.


25 Like cold water to a weary soul
 is good news from a distant land.
26 A righteous man who gives way before the wicked
 is a muddied spring and a polluted fountain.
27 It is not good to eat much honey,
 nor to seek out one’s own glory.
28 A man without self-control
 is a city broken down, without walls.




Chapter 26


1 Like snow in summer and rain in harvest,
 so honor is not fitting for a fool.
2 Like a fluttering sparrow, like a flying swallow,
 so a curse without cause does not come.


3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey,
 and a rod for the back of fools.
4 Do not answer a fool according to his folly,
 lest you also become like him.
5 Answer a fool according to his folly,
 lest he be wise in his own eyes.


6 He who sends a message by the hand of a fool
 cuts off his own feet and drinks violence.
7 The legs of the lame hang useless;
 so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
8 Like one who binds a stone in a sling
 is he who gives honor to a fool.
9 Like a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard
 is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
10 A master may form all things,
 but he who hires a fool hires passers-by.
11 As a dog returns to its vomit,
 so a fool repeats his folly.
12 Do you see a man wise in his own eyes?
 There is more hope for a fool than for him.


13 The sluggard says, “A lion is in the road;
 a lion is in the streets.”
14 A door turns on its hinges,
 and a sluggard on his bed.
15 The sluggard buries his hand in the dish;
 he is weary of bringing it back to his mouth.
16 A sluggard is wiser in his own eyes
 than seven men who answer sensibly.


17 He who seizes a dog by the ears
 is a man passing by who gets involved in another’s quarrel.
18 Like a madman who throws firebrands,
 arrows, and death,
19 is the man who deceives his neighbor
 and says, “I was only joking.”


20 Where there is no wood, the fire goes out;
 and where there is no whisperer, contention quiets.
21 As charcoal to embers and wood to fire,
 so is a contentious man to kindle strife.
22 The words of a whisperer are like tasty morsels;
 they go down into the innermost parts.


23 Like silver glaze on earthenware
 are fervent lips with an evil heart.
24 He who hates disguises himself with his lips,
 but stores up deceit within him.
25 When he makes his voice gracious, do not trust him,
 for seven abominations are in his heart.
26 Though his hatred is covered by deceit,
 his wickedness will be revealed in the assembly.
27 He who digs a pit will fall into it,
 and he who rolls a stone, it will return upon him.
28 A lying tongue hates its crushed victims,
 and a flattering mouth brings ruin.




Chapter 27


1 Do not boast about tomorrow,
 for you do not know what a day will bring.


2 Let another man praise you, and not your own mouth;
 a stranger, and not your own lips.
3 A stone is heavy, and sand is weighty,
 but a fool’s provocation is heavier than both.
4 Wrath is cruel, and anger is overwhelming,
 but who can stand before jealousy?


5 Better is open rebuke
 than hidden love.
6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend,
 but profuse are the kisses of an enemy.
7 A full soul tramples honeycomb,
 but to a hungry soul everything bitter is sweet.
8 Like a bird wandering from its nest
 is a man wandering from his place.
9 Oil and perfume gladden the heart,
 and the sweetness of a friend comes from earnest counsel.
10 Do not forsake your friend or your father’s friend,
 and do not go to your brother’s house in the day of your calamity;
 better is a neighbor who is near
 than a brother who is far away.


11 Be wise, my son, and make my heart glad,
 so that I may answer him who taunts me.
12 A prudent man sees danger and hides himself,
 but the simple pass on and suffer for it.


13 Take his garment who is surety for a stranger,
 and take a pledge from him for a foreign woman.
14 He who blesses his friend with a loud voice early in the morning—
 it will be counted as a curse to him.
15 A continual dripping on a rainy day
 and a quarrelsome woman are alike;
16 he who restrains her restrains the wind,
 and grasps oil with his right hand.


17 Iron sharpens iron,
 and a man sharpens the face of his friend.
18 He who tends a fig tree will eat its fruit,
 and he who guards his master will be honored.
19 As water reflects a face,
 so a man’s heart reflects the man.
20 Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied,
 and a man’s eyes are never satisfied.
21 The crucible is for silver, and the furnace for gold,
 and a man is tested by the praise he receives.
22 Though you crush a fool in a mortar
 with a pestle along with grain,
 his folly will not depart from him.


23 Know well the condition of your flock;
 set your heart to your herds,
24 for wealth is not forever,
 nor does a crown endure to all generations.
25 When the grass disappears and new growth is seen,
 and the herbs of the mountains are gathered,
26 lambs will provide your clothing,
 and goats the price of a field;
27 and there will be goats’ milk enough for your food,
 for the food of your household,
 and sustenance for your maidens.




Chapter 28


1 The wicked flee when no man pursues,
 but the righteous are as bold as a lion.


2 Because of the transgression of a land its princes are many,
 but by a man of understanding and knowledge it endures.
3 A poor man who oppresses the lowly
 is a sweeping rain that leaves no food.
4 Those who forsake the law praise the wicked,
 but those who keep the law contend with them.
5 Evil men do not understand justice,
 but those who seek the LORD understand everything.


6 Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity
 than a perverse man who is rich.
7 He who keeps the law is a wise son,
 but he who keeps company with gluttons disgraces his father.
8 He who increases his wealth by interest and profit
 gathers it for him who shows grace to the poor.
9 He who turns his ear away from hearing the law—
 even his prayer is an abomination.


10 He who misleads the upright into an evil path
 will fall into his own pit,
 but the blameless will inherit good.
11 A rich man is wise in his own eyes,
 but a discerning poor man searches him out.


12 When the righteous triumph, there is great glory,
 but when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.
13 He who conceals his transgressions will not prosper,
 but he who confesses and forsakes them will obtain mercy.
14 Happy is the man who is always cautious,
 but he who hardens his heart will fall into trouble.


15 A roaring lion and a charging bear
 is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
16 A prince lacking understanding is a great oppressor,
 but he who hates unjust gain will prolong his days.
17 A man burdened with the blood of another
 will flee to the pit; let no man support him.
18 He who walks blamelessly will be delivered,
 but he who is crooked in his ways will fall at once.


19 He who works his land will have plenty of bread,
 but he who pursues worthless things will have plenty of poverty.
20 A faithful man will abound with blessings,
 but he who hastens to be rich will not go unpunished.
21 To show partiality is not good,
 yet for a piece of bread a man will do wrong.
22 A man with an evil eye hastens after wealth,
 and does not know that want will come upon him.
23 He who rebukes a man will afterward find more favor
 than he who flatters with the tongue.


24 He who robs his father or his mother and says, “It is no transgression,”
 is a companion to a destroyer.
25 A greedy man stirs up strife,
 but he who trusts in the LORD will prosper.
26 He who trusts in his own heart is a fool,
 but he who walks in wisdom will escape.
27 He who gives to the poor will lack nothing,
 but he who hides his eyes will receive many curses.


28 When the wicked rise, men hide themselves;
 but when they perish, the righteous increase.




Chapter 29


1 A man who stiffens his neck after many rebukes
will suddenly be broken without remedy.
2 When the righteous increase, a nation rejoices,
but when a wicked man rules, a nation groans.
3 A man who loves wisdom gladdens his father,
but one who keeps company with prostitutes wastes wealth.
4 By justice a king establishes a land,
but a man who takes bribes tears it down.
5 A man who flatters his neighbor
spreads a net for his feet.
6 In the transgression of a wicked man there is a snare,
but a righteous man sings and rejoices.
7 A righteous man cares for the cause of the poor,
but a wicked man understands nothing.
8 Scoffers set a city on fire,
but the wise turn away wrath.
9 When a wise man disputes with a fool,
the fool rages or laughs, and there is no rest.
10 Men of blood hate one who is blameless,
but the upright seek his life to protect it.
11 A fool gives full vent to his spirit,
but a wise man quietly holds it back.
12 If a ruler listens to lies,
all his servants become wicked.
13 The poor man and the oppressor meet together;
the LORD gives light to the eyes of both.
14 If a king judges the poor with truth,
his throne will be established forever.
15 A rod and reproof give wisdom,
but a child left to himself brings shame to his mother.
16 When the wicked increase, transgression increases,
but the righteous will look on their downfall.
17 Discipline your son, and he will give you rest;
he will give delight to your soul.
18 Where there is no vision, a man casts off restraint,
but he who keeps the law is blessed.
19 A servant will not be corrected by words,
for he understands, yet he will not respond.
20 Do you see a man hasty in his words?
There is more hope for a fool than for him.
21 If a man pampers his servant from youth,
in the end that servant will act as a son.
22 A man of anger stirs up strife,
and a hot-tempered man commits many transgressions.
23 A man’s pride brings him low,
but a man of lowly spirit will obtain honor.
24 Whoever shares with a thief hates his own life;
he hears the oath to testify but says nothing.
25 The fear of man lays a snare,
but whoever trusts in the LORD is set secure.
26 Many seek the face of a ruler,
but a man’s justice comes from the LORD.
27 A wicked man is an abomination to the righteous,
and he who is upright in the way is an abomination to the wicked.




Chapter 30


1 The words of Agur son of Jakeh—the utterance:
The man declares to Ithiel, to Ithiel and Ucal:


2 Surely I am more brutish than any man,
and I do not have a man’s understanding.
3 I have not learned wisdom,
nor do I know the knowledge of the Holy One.


4 Who has gone up to heaven and come down?
Who has gathered the wind in his fists?
Who has wrapped the waters in a garment?
Who has established all the ends of the earth?
What is his name, and what is his son’s name? You know.


5 Every word of God is refined;
he is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
6 Do not add to his words
lest he reprove you and you be found a liar.


7 Two things I ask of you;
do not withhold them from me before I die:
8 Remove falsehood and lying far from me;
give me neither poverty nor riches—
feed me with the food allotted to me,
9 lest I become full and deny you and say, “Who is the LORD?”
or lest I become poor and steal
and profane the name of my God.


10 Do not slander a servant to his master,
lest he curse you and you be found guilty.


11 There is a generation that curses its father
and does not bless its mother.
12 There is a generation that is pure in its own eyes
yet is not washed from its filth.
13 There is a generation—how lofty are their eyes,
and their eyelids are lifted high.


14 There is a generation whose teeth are swords
and whose jaw teeth are knives,
to devour the afflicted from the earth
and the needy from among men.


15 The leech has two daughters: “Give” and “Give.”
Three things are never satisfied;
four never say, “Enough”:
16 the grave, and the barren womb,
the earth that is never filled with water,
and fire that never says, “Enough.”


17 The eye that mocks a father
and scorns obedience to a mother—
the ravens of the valley will pluck it out,
and the young eagles will eat it.


18 Three things are too wondrous for me,
and four I do not understand:
19 the way of an eagle in the sky,
the way of a serpent on a rock,
the way of a ship in the heart of the sea,
and the way of a man with a young woman.


20 This is the way of an adulterous woman:
she eats and wipes her mouth
and says, “I have done no wrong.”


21 Under three things the earth trembles,
and under four it cannot bear up:
22 under a servant when he becomes king,
and a fool when he is satisfied with food,
23 under a hated woman when she is married,
and a maidservant when she displaces her mistress.


24 Four things on the earth are small,
but they are exceedingly wise:
25 the ants are a people not strong,
yet they prepare their food in the summer;
26 the rock badgers are not a mighty people,
yet they make their house in the cliffs;
27 the locusts have no king,
yet they all march in ranks;
28 the lizard you can grasp with your hands,
yet it is in kings’ palaces.


29 Three things have a stately stride,
and four are stately in their walk:
30 the lion, mighty among beasts,
who does not turn back from anything;


31 the strutting rooster, or the he-goat,
and a king when his army is with him.


32 If you have been foolish in exalting yourself,
or if you have devised evil, put your hand to your mouth.
33 For pressing milk produces curds,
and pressing the nose produces blood,
and pressing anger produces strife.




Chapter 31


1 The words of Lemuel, king—the utterance
that his mother taught him:


2 What, my son?
And what, son of my womb?
And what, son of my vows?
3 Do not give your strength to women,
nor your ways to those who destroy kings.


4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel,
it is not for kings to drink wine,
nor for rulers to crave strong drink,
5 lest he drink and forget what is decreed,
and pervert the justice of any of the afflicted.


6 Give strong drink to the one who is perishing,
and wine to those bitter of soul;
7 let him drink and forget his poverty,
and let him remember his misery no more.


8 Open your mouth for the mute,
for the rights of all who are passing away.
9 Open your mouth, judge righteously,
and defend the poor and needy.


10 A woman of valor, who can find her?
Her worth is far beyond rubies.
11 The heart of her husband trusts in her,
and he will have no lack of gain.
12 She does him good and not harm
all the days of her life.


13 She seeks wool and flax
and works with willing hands.
14 She is like the merchant ships;
she brings her food from afar.
15 She rises while it is still night
and gives food to her household
and a portion to her maidservants.


16 She considers a field and buys it;
from the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.
17 She girds her waist with strength
and makes her arms strong.
18 She perceives that her merchandise is good;
her lamp does not go out at night.
19 She stretches out her hands to the distaff,
and her palms grasp the spindle.


20 She opens her hand to the poor
and reaches out her hands to the needy.
21 She is not afraid for her household because of snow,
for all her household are clothed in scarlet.
22 She makes coverings for herself;
her clothing is fine linen and purple.


23 Her husband is known in the gates,
when he sits among the elders of the land.
24 She makes linen garments and sells them
and supplies sashes to the merchant.


25 Strength and splendor are her clothing,
and she laughs at the days to come.
26 She opens her mouth with wisdom,
and faithful instruction is on her tongue.
27 She watches over the ways of her household
and does not eat the bread of idleness.


28 Her children rise up and call her blessed;
her husband also, and he praises her:
29 “Many daughters have done valorously,
but you surpass them all.”


30 Charm is deceptive and beauty is fleeting,
but a woman who fears the LORD is to be praised.
31 Give her the fruit of her hands,
and let her works praise her in the gates.