Song of Solomon


Chapter 1


1 The Song of Songs, which is Solomon’s.


2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth! 
For your love is better than wine.
3 Your oils have a pleasing fragrance;
your name is poured-out oil;
therefore the maidens love you.
4 Draw me after you—let us run!
The king has brought me into his chambers.


We will rejoice and be glad in you;
we will praise your love more than wine.
Rightly do they love you.


5 I am black but beautiful, O daughters of Jerusalem,
like the tents of Kedar,
like the curtains of Solomon.
6 Do not gaze at me because I am dark,
because the sun has scorched me.
My mother’s sons were angry with me;
they made me keeper of the vineyards,
but my own vineyard I have not kept.


7 Tell me, you whom my soul loves,
where you pasture your flock, where you make it lie down at noon;
for why should I be like one who veils herself beside the flocks of your companions?


8 If you do not know, most beautiful among women,
go forth in the footsteps of the flock and pasture your young goats beside the shepherds’ tents.


9 To a mare among Pharaoh’s chariots I compare you, my darling.
10 Your cheeks are lovely with ornaments,
your neck with strings of beads.
11 We will make for you ornaments of gold with studs of silver.


12 While the king was at his table,
my perfume gave forth its fragrance.
13 My beloved is to me a pouch of myrrh
that lies all night between my breasts.
14 My beloved is to me a cluster of henna blossoms in the vineyards of En-Gedi.


15 Behold, you are beautiful, my darling;
behold, you are beautiful;
your eyes are like doves.


16 Behold, you are handsome, my beloved, indeed pleasant.
Our couch is luxuriant.
17 The beams of our house are cedars;
our rafters, cypresses.




Chapter 2


1 I am a rose of Sharon,
a lily of the valleys.


2 Like a lily among thorns,
so is my darling among the daughters.


3 Like an apple tree among the trees of the forest,
so is my beloved among the young men.
In his shade I delighted to sit,
and his fruit was sweet to my taste.


4 He brought me into the house of wine,
and his banner over me was love.
5 Sustain me with raisin cakes,
refresh me with apples,
for I am sick with love.
6 His left hand is under my head,
and his right hand embraces me.
7 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
by the gazelles or by the does of the field,
that you not arouse or awaken love until it pleases.


8 The voice of my beloved!
Behold, he is coming,
leaping on the mountains,
bounding over the hills.
9 My beloved is like a gazelle or a young stag.
Behold, he is standing behind our wall,
looking through the windows,
peering through the lattice.


10 My beloved responded and said to me,
“Arise, my darling, my beautiful one, and come away.
11 For the winter has passed;
the rain is over and gone.
12 The blossoms have appeared in the land,
the time of singing has come,
and the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land.
13 The fig tree ripens its figs,
and the vines in blossom give forth fragrance.
Arise, my darling, my beautiful one, and come away.”


14 O my dove, in the clefts of the rock,
in the hiding place of the cliff,
let me see your face, let me hear your voice;
for your voice is sweet, and your appearance is lovely.


15 Catch the foxes for us,
the little foxes that are ruining the vineyards,
for our vineyards are in blossom.


16 My beloved is mine and I am his;
he pastures his flock among the lilies.
17 Until the day breathes and the shadows flee, turn, my beloved;
be like a gazelle or a young stag on the cleft mountains.




Chapter 3


1 On my bed by night I sought him whom my soul loves;
I sought him but did not find him.
2 I will rise now and go about the city, in the streets and in the squares;
I will seek him whom my soul loves. I sought him but did not find him.
3 The watchmen who go about the city found me:
“Have you seen him whom my soul loves?”
4 Scarcely had I passed them when I found him whom my soul loves.
I held him and would not let him go until I had brought him into my mother's house,
into the chamber of her who conceived me.


5 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
by the gazelles or the does of the field,
not to stir up or awaken love until it pleases.


6 Who is this coming up from the wilderness like columns of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,
with all the fragrant powders of the merchant?
7 Behold, it is Solomon’s litter!
Around it are sixty mighty men,
of the mighty men of Israel,
8 all of them armed with swords and expert in war,
each with his sword at his thigh, against fear in the night.
9 King Solomon made himself a carriage from the wood of Lebanon.
10 He made its posts of silver, its back of gold, its seat of purple;
its interior was inlaid with love by the daughters of Jerusalem.


11 Go out, O daughters of Zion, and look upon King Solomon,
with the crown with which his mother crowned him on the day of his wedding,
on the day of the gladness of his heart.




Chapter 4


1 Behold, you are beautiful, my darling;
behold, you are beautiful.
Your eyes are doves behind your veil.
Your hair is like a flock of goats
that descend from Mount Gilead.
2 Your teeth are like a flock of shorn ewes
that have come up from the washing,
all of which bear twins,
and none among them has lost her young.
3 Your lips are like a scarlet thread,
and your mouth is lovely.
Your cheeks behind your veil are like halves of a pomegranate.
4 Your neck is like the tower of David,
built in rows of stone;
on it hang a thousand shields,
all of them shields of warriors.
5 Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle,
that graze among the lilies.


6 Until the day breathes and the shadows flee,
I will go to the mountain of myrrh and to the hill of frankincense.
7 You are altogether beautiful, my darling;
there is no blemish in you.


8 Come with me from Lebanon, my bride;
come with me from Lebanon.
Depart from the peak of Amana,
from the summit of Senir and Hermon,
from the dens of lions,
from the mountains of leopards.


9 You have captured my heart, my sister, my bride;
you have captured my heart with one glance of your eyes,
with one jewel of your necklace.
10 How beautiful is your love, my sister, my bride!
How much better is your love than wine,
and the fragrance of your oils than all spices!
11 Your lips drip nectar, my bride;
honey and milk are under your tongue;
the scent of your garments is like the scent of Lebanon.


12 A locked garden is my sister, my bride,
a locked spring, a sealed fountain.
13 Your shoots are an orchard of pomegranates
with choice fruits, henna with nard,
14 nard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon,
with all trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes,
with all the chief spices—
15 a garden spring, a well of living water,
and flowing streams from Lebanon.


16 Awake, O north wind, and come, O south wind!
Blow upon my garden, let its fragrance be wafted abroad.
Let my beloved come to his garden and eat its choicest fruits.




Chapter 5


1 I have come to my garden, my sister, my bride;
I have gathered my myrrh with my spice,
I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey,
I have drunk my wine with my milk.
Eat, friends; drink and be drunk with love.


2 I was asleep, but my heart was awake.
The sound of my beloved knocking:
“Open to me, my sister, my darling, my dove, my perfect one,
for my head is filled with dew, my locks with the drops of the night.”
3 I had taken off my garment; how could I put it on again?
I had washed my feet; how could I soil them again?
4 My beloved put his hand through the opening,
and my heart was stirred for him.
5 I arose to open to my beloved,
and my hands dripped with myrrh,
my fingers with flowing myrrh,
on the handles of the bolt.
6 I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had turned away and was gone.
My soul failed when he spoke.
I sought him, but did not find him;
I called him, but he gave no answer.
7 The watchmen found me as they made their rounds in the city;
they struck me, they wounded me;
the guards on the walls took my cloak from me.
8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem,
if you find my beloved, that you tell him I am faint with love.


9 What is your beloved more than another beloved,
O most beautiful among women?
What is your beloved more than another beloved, that you so charge us?


10 My beloved is radiant and ruddy,
distinguished among ten thousand.
11 His head is pure gold; his locks are wavy, black as a raven.
12 His eyes are like doves beside streams of water,
bathed in milk, set like jewels.
13 His cheeks are like beds of spice yielding fragrance;
his lips are lilies, dripping flowing myrrh.
14 His arms are rods of gold, set with beryl;
his body is polished ivory, overlaid with sapphires.
15 His legs are pillars of alabaster, set on pedestals of fine gold.
His appearance is like Lebanon, choice as the cedars.
16 His mouth is sweetness itself; he is altogether desirable.
This is my beloved and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.




Chapter 6


1 Where has your beloved gone, O most beautiful among women?
Where has your beloved turned, that we may seek him with you?


2 My beloved has gone down to his garden, to the beds of spices,
to graze in the gardens and to gather lilies.
3 I am my beloved’s, and my beloved is mine;
he grazes among the lilies.


4 You are beautiful as Tirzah, my darling,
lovely as Jerusalem, awe-inspiring as bannered hosts.
5 Turn your eyes away from me, for they overwhelm me.
Your hair is like a flock of goats descending from Gilead.
6 Your teeth are like a flock of ewes coming up from the washing,
all of them bearing twins, and not one among them has lost her young.
7 Like a slice of pomegranate is your temple behind your veil.
8 There are sixty queens and eighty concubines, and maidens without number,
9 but my dove, my perfect one, is unique—she is the only one of her mother,
the favorite of her who bore her.
The daughters saw her and called her blessed;
the queens and concubines praised her:


10 “Who is this that looks forth like the dawn,
fair as the moon, clear as the sun,
awe-inspiring as bannered hosts?”


11 I went down to the grove of nut trees to see the blossoms of the valley,
to see whether the vine had budded, whether the pomegranates were in bloom.
12 Before I knew it, my soul had set me among the chariots of my noble people.


13 Return, return, O Shulammite! Return, return, that we may look upon you.
Why should you look upon the Shulammite, as upon the dance of Mahanaim?




Chapter 7


1 How beautiful are your feet in sandals, O noble daughter!
The curves of your hips are like ornaments, the work of a master’s hand.
2 Your navel is a rounded bowl that never lacks mixed wine;
your belly is a heap of wheat, encircled with lilies.
3 Your two breasts are like two fawns, twins of a gazelle.


4 Your neck is like a tower of ivory;
your eyes are pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim;
your nose is like the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.
5 Your head crowns you like Carmel, and the flowing locks of your head are like purple;
a king is held captive in the tresses.


6 How beautiful and how pleasant you are, O love, with your delights!
7 Your stature is like a palm tree, and your breasts are like its clusters.
8 I said, “I will climb the palm tree; I will take hold of its fruit stalks.”
May your breasts be like clusters of the vine,
and the scent of your breath like apples,
9 and your mouth like the best wine.


It goes down smoothly for my beloved,
gliding over lips and teeth.
10 I am my beloved’s, and his desire is for me.


11 Come, my beloved, let us go out into the field;
let us lodge in the villages.
12 Let us go out early to the vineyards;
let us see whether the vine has budded,
whether the blossoms have opened,
and the pomegranates are in bloom.
There I will give you my love.
13 The mandrakes give off fragrance,
and at our doors are all kinds of precious fruits,
new as well as old,
which I have laid up for you, O my beloved.




Chapter 8


1 Oh, that you were like a brother to me, who nursed at my mother's breasts!
If I found you outside, I would kiss you, and no one would despise me.
2 I would lead you and bring you into the house of my mother—she who taught me.
I would give you spiced wine to drink, the juice of my pomegranate.
3 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand embraces me.
4 I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, do not arouse or awaken love until it pleases.


5 Who is this coming up from the wilderness, leaning on her beloved?
Under the apple tree I awakened you;
there your mother was in labor with you;
there she who bore you was in labor.


6 Set me as a seal upon your heart, as a seal upon your arm,
for love is strong as death, jealousy is fierce as the grave.
Its flashes are flashes of fire, the very flame of the LORD.
7 Many waters cannot quench love, nor can floods drown it.
If a man offered all the wealth of his house for love,
he would be utterly despised.


8 We have a little sister, and she has no breasts.
What shall we do for our sister on the day when she is spoken for?
9 If she is a wall, we will build upon her a turret of silver;
but if she is a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar.
10 I was a wall, and my breasts were like towers;
then I was in his eyes as one who finds peace.


11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon;
he let out the vineyard to keepers;
each one was to bring a thousand shekels of silver for its fruit.
12 My vineyard, my very own, is before me;
you, O Solomon, may have the thousand,
and the keepers of the fruit two hundred.


13 You who dwell in the gardens, companions are listening for your voice;
let me hear it.
14 Make haste, my beloved, and be like a gazelle
or a young stag on the mountains of spices.