Ezekiel


Chapter 1


1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, on the fifth day of the month, while I was among the exiles by the River Chebar, that the heavens were opened and I saw visions of God.


2 On the fifth day of the month—it was the fifth year of the exile of King Jehoiachin—
3 the word of the LORD came to Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the River Chebar. And the hand of the LORD was upon him there.


4 And I looked, and saw a storm wind came out of the north, a great cloud with fire flashing back and forth, and a brilliance all around it, and in the midst of the fire something like glowing metal.
5 And from its midst came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they had the likeness of a man.
6 Each one had four faces, and each one of them had four wings.
7 Their legs were straight, and the soles of their feet were like the sole of a calf’s foot; and they sparkled like polished bronze.
8 Under their wings on their four sides were human hands. And the four of them had their faces and their wings.
9 Their wings touched one another. They did not turn as they moved; each went straight forward.
10 As for the likeness of their faces, each had the face of a man; and all four had the face of a lion on the right side, and all four had the face of an ox on the left side, and all four had the face of an eagle.
11 Such were their faces. Their wings were spread out above; each had two wings touching another, and two covering their bodies.
12 And each went straight forward; wherever the Spirit would go, they went, without turning as they moved.


13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches. Fire moved back and forth among the living creatures, and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.
14 And the living creatures darted back and forth, like the appearance of a flash of lightning.


15 Now as I looked at the living creatures, I saw a wheel was on the ground beside each of the living creatures, one for each of the four of them.
16 The appearance of the wheels and their workmanship was like the gleam of beryl. All four of them had the same form, and their appearance and their workmanship was as if a wheel were within a wheel.
17 When they moved, they went in any of the four directions without turning as they moved.
18 As for their rims, they were tall and awesome, and the rims of all four were full of eyes all around.
19 And when the living creatures moved, the wheels moved beside them; and when the living creatures rose from the ground, the wheels rose.
20 Wherever the spirit would go, they went, and the wheels rose along with them; for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.
21 When the creatures moved, the wheels moved; when they stood still, the wheels stood still; and when they rose from the ground, the wheels rose along with them, for the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels.


22 And above the heads of the living creatures there was the likeness of an expanse, like the gleam of crystal, spread out above their heads.
23 And under the expanse their wings were stretched out straight, one toward another. Each one also had two wings covering its body.
24 And I heard the sound of their wings, like the sound of many waters, like the voice of the Almighty, a sound of tumult like the sound of an army. When they stood still, they let down their wings.
25 Then there came a voice from above the expanse that was over their heads. When they stood still, they let down their wings.


26 And above the expanse that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, in appearance like sapphire; and upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness with the appearance of a man seated on it from above.
27 And I saw something like glowing metal, like the appearance of fire all around within it, from the appearance of his waist and upward. And from the appearance of his waist and downward, I saw something like fire, and there was brightness all around him.
28 Like the appearance of the rainbow that is in the cloud on the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness all around. Such was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. And when I saw it, I fell on my face and heard the voice of one speaking.




Chapter 2


1 Then he said to me, “Son of man, stand on your feet, and I will speak with you.”
2 And as he spoke to me, the Spirit entered into me and set me on my feet, and I heard him speaking to me.
3 And he said to me, “Son of man, I am sending you to the sons of Israel, to rebellious nations who have rebelled against me. They and their fathers have transgressed against me to this very day.
4 And the sons are impudent and stubborn. I am sending you to them, and you shall say to them, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD.’
5 And whether they listen or refuse to listen—for they are a rebellious house—they will know that a prophet has been among them.


6 But you, son of man, do not be afraid of them or of their words. Though briers and thorns are with you and you sit among scorpions, do not be afraid of their words or be dismayed at their faces, for they are a rebellious house.
7 And you shall speak my words to them, whether they listen or refuse to listen, for they are rebellious.
8 But you, son of man, hear what I say to you. Do not be rebellious like that rebellious house. Open your mouth and eat what I give you.”


9 Then I looked, and behold, a hand was stretched out to me, and behold, in it was a scroll.
10 And he spread it out before me, and it was written on the front and on the back. And written on it were words of lamentation, mourning, and woe.




Chapter 3


1 And he said to me, “Son of man, eat what you find; eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.”
2 So I opened my mouth, and he gave me this scroll to eat.
3 And he said to me, “Son of man, feed your stomach and fill your belly with this scroll that I give you.” Then I ate it, and it was in my mouth as sweet as honey.


4 Then he said to me, “Son of man, go to the house of Israel and speak my words to them.
5 For you are not sent to a people of ⁸obscure speech and difficult language, but to the house of Israel—
6 not to many nations of obscure speech and difficult language, whose words you cannot understand. Surely, if I sent you to them, they would listen to you.
7 But the house of Israel will not be willing to listen to you, for they are not willing to listen to me. For all the house of Israel are hard-headed and stubborn of heart.
8 Behold, I have made your face as hard as their faces, and your forehead as hard as their foreheads.
9 Like emery harder than flint I have made your forehead. Do not be afraid of them or dismayed at their faces, for they are a rebellious house.”


10 Moreover he said to me, “Son of man, receive in your heart and hear with your ears all my words that I speak to you.
11 And go to the exiles, to the sons of your people, and speak to them. Say to them, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD,’ whether they listen or refuse to listen.”


12 Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard behind me the sound of a great rumbling voice: “Blessed be the glory of the LORD from his place!”
13 I also heard the sound of the wings of the living creatures touching one another, and the sound of the wheels beside them, a great rumbling sound.
14 So the Spirit lifted me up and took me away, and I went in bitterness in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of the LORD was strong upon me.


15 And I came to the exiles at Tel-abib, who dwelt by the River Chebar, and I sat where they were dwelling. And I sat there seven days, stunned among them.
16 And at the end of seven days, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
17 “Son of man, I have made you a watchman for the house of Israel. When you hear a word from my mouth, give them warning from me.
18 When I say to the wicked, ‘You shall surely die,’ and you do not warn him or speak to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, that wicked man shall die in his guilt, but his blood I will require at your hand.
19 But if you warn the wicked and he does not turn from his wickedness or from his wicked way, he shall die in his guilt, but you will have delivered your soul.
20 Again, when a righteous man turns from his righteousness and commits iniquity, and I place a stumbling block before him, he shall die. Because you have not warned him, he shall die in his sin, and his righteous deeds that he has done shall not be remembered, but his blood I will require at your hand.
21 But if you warn the righteous man not to sin, and he does not sin, he shall surely live, because he took warning, and you will have delivered your soul.”


22 And the hand of the LORD was upon me there, and he said to me, “Arise, go out to the plain, and there I will speak with you.”


23 So I arose and went out to the plain, and the glory of the LORD stood there, like the glory that I had seen by the River Chebar, and I fell on my face.
24 Then the Spirit entered into me and set me on my feet, and he spoke with me and said to me, “Go, shut yourself inside your house.
25 And you, son of man, cords will be placed upon you, and you will be bound with them so that you cannot go out among them.
26 And I will make your tongue cling to the roof of your mouth, so that you shall be mute and unable to rebuke them, for they are a rebellious house.
27 But when I speak with you, I will open your mouth, and you shall say to them, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD.’ He who hears, let him hear, and he who refuses, let him refuse, for they are a rebellious house.”




Chapter 4


1 “And you, son of man, take a brick and set it before you, and engrave on it a city—Jerusalem.
2 Then lay siege against it, and build a siege wall against it, and raise up a ramp against it, and set camps against it, and place battering rams all around it.
3 Then take an iron plate and set it as an iron wall between you and the city, and set your face against it, and it shall be under siege, and you shall besiege it. This will be a sign to the house of Israel.
4 Then lie on your left side, and place the guilt of the house of Israel upon it. According to the number of days that you lie on it, you shall bear their guilt.
5 For I assign you a number of days, equal to the number of the years of their guilt—three hundred ninety days. Thus you shall bear the guilt of the house of Israel.
6 And when you have completed these, lie down again, but on your right side, and you shall bear the guilt of the house of Judah forty days. A day for each year I assign you, a day for each year.


7 Then you shall set your face firmly toward the siege of Jerusalem, with your arm bared, and you shall prophesy against it.
8 And I will place cords upon you, so that you cannot turn from one side to the other, until you have completed the days of your siege.
9 And you, take wheat, barley, beans, lentils, millet, and spelt; put them in a single vessel and make bread out of them for yourself. You shall eat it according to the number of the days that you lie on your side—three hundred ninety days you shall eat it.
10 And your food that you eat each day shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day; you shall eat it from time to time.
11 And you shall drink water by measure, the sixth part of a hin; you shall drink it from time to time.
12 And you shall eat it as barley cake, and you shall bake it in their sight on human dung.”


13 And the LORD said, “Thus shall the sons of Israel eat their bread unclean among the nations where I will drive them.”


14 Then I said, “Ah, Lord GOD! Look, I have never been defiled; from my youth until now I have not eaten what died of itself or was torn by beasts, nor has unclean meat entered my mouth.”
15 Then he said to me, “See, I will give you cow dung instead of human dung, and you shall prepare your bread on it.”
16 Moreover, he said to me, “Son of man, behold, I am about to break the staff of bread in Jerusalem. And they shall eat bread by weight and with anxiety, and drink water by measure and in horror,
17 that they may lack bread and water, and be appalled with one another, and rot away in their guilt.”




Chapter 5


1 “And you, son of man, take a sharp sword. Use it as a barber’s razor and pass it over your head and your beard. Then take balances and divide the hair.
2 A third part you shall burn with fire in the midst of the city when the days of the siege are completed. A third part you shall strike with the sword all around the city. And a third part you shall scatter to the wind, and I will unsheathe a sword after them.
3 And take from these a few in number and bind them in the folds of your robe.
4 And from these again take some and throw them into the fire and burn them in the fire. From there a fire will go out into all the house of Israel.”


5 Thus says the Lord GOD: This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the midst of the nations, with countries all around her.
6 But she has rebelled against my judgments more than the nations, and against my statutes more than the countries that are around her. For they have rejected my judgments, and as for my statutes, they have not walked in them.
7 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have multiplied your disobedience more than the nations around you, and have not walked in my statutes nor kept my judgments, nor even acted according to the rules of the nations that are around you—
8 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Look: I, even I, am against you, and I will execute judgments in your midst in the sight of the nations.
9 And I will do with you what I have never done, and the like of which I will never do again, because of all your abominations.


10 Therefore fathers shall eat their sons in your midst, and sons shall eat their fathers. And I will execute judgments on you, and scatter all your remnant to every wind.
11 Therefore, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, surely, because you have defiled my sanctuary with all your detestable things and with all your abominations, I myself will withdraw, and my eye will not spare, and I will have no pity.
12 A third of you shall die by pestilence and be consumed with famine in your midst. A third shall fall by the sword all around you. And a third I will scatter to every wind, and I will unsheathe a sword after them.
13 Then my anger shall be spent, and I will cause my wrath to rest upon them, and I will be satisfied. And they shall know that I, the LORD, have spoken in my zeal, when I have spent my wrath upon them.
14 Moreover, I will make you a ruin and a reproach among the nations that are around you, in the sight of all who pass by.


15 So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, a warning and a horror to the nations around you, when I execute judgments on you in anger and in wrath and in furious rebukes—I, the LORD, have spoken—


16 when I send against you the deadly arrows of famine, arrows for destruction, which I will send to destroy you. And I will increase the famine upon you and break your supply of bread.


17 I will send famine and wild beasts against you, and they shall bereave you. Pestilence and blood shall pass through you, and I will bring the sword upon you. I, the LORD, have spoken.”




Chapter 6


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face toward the mountains of Israel and prophesy against them.
3 And say, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus says the Lord GOD to the mountains and the hills, to the ravines and the valleys: See here! I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.


4 Your altars shall become desolate, and your incense altars shall be broken. And I will cast down your slain before your idols.
5 And I will lay the dead bodies of the sons of Israel before their idols, and I will scatter your bones around your altars.
6 In all your dwelling places the cities shall be laid waste and the high places shall be desolate, so that your altars may be laid waste and become desolate, and your idols broken and brought to an end, your incense altars cut down, and your works wiped out.
7 And the slain shall fall in your midst, and you shall know that I am the LORD.


8 Yet I will leave a remnant, when you have some who escape the sword among the nations, when you are scattered through the lands.
9 Then those of you who escape will remember me among the nations where they are carried captive, how I was crushed by their adulterous heart, which departed from me, and by their eyes, which go whoring after their idols. And they will loathe themselves for the evils that they have committed in all their abominations.
10 And they shall know that I am the LORD. I have not said in vain that I would bring this evil upon them.


11 Thus says the Lord GOD: Strike your hand and stamp your foot, and say, Alas! for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel, for they shall fall by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.
12 He who is far off shall die by pestilence, and he who is near shall fall by the sword, and he who remains and is besieged shall die by famine. Thus I will spend my fury upon them.
13 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when their slain lie among their idols around their altars, on every high hill, on all the mountaintops, under every green tree, and under every leafy oak—the places where they offered pleasing aroma to all their idols.
14 And I will stretch out my hand against them and make the land desolate and a waste, from the wilderness to Riblah, in all their dwelling places. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 7


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “And you, son of man, thus says the Lord GOD to the land of Israel: An end! The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
3 Now the end is upon you, and I will send my anger upon you; I will judge you according to your ways, and I will bring upon you all your abominations.
4 My eye shall not spare you, nor will I have pity, but I will bring your ways upon you, and your abominations shall be in your midst; then you shall know that I am the LORD.


5 Thus says the Lord GOD: A disaster—only one disaster—but look, it is coming!
6 An end has come, the end has come; it has awakened against you. Look out, it is coming!
7 Your doom has come to you, O inhabitant of the land. The time has come, the day is near—a day of tumult, and not of joyful shouting on the mountains.
8 Now I will soon pour out my wrath upon you, and spend my anger against you, and judge you according to your ways; and I will bring upon you all your abominations.
9 My eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. I will repay you according to your ways, while your abominations are in your midst. Then you shall know that it is I, the LORD, who strikes.


10 Look out for the day! See! It is coming! Your doom has gone out. The rod has blossomed, pride has budded.
11 Violence has grown into a rod of wickedness. None of them shall remain, nor their abundance, nor their wealth; neither shall there be preeminence among them.
12 The time has come, the day has arrived. Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is upon all their multitude.
13 For the seller shall not return to what he has sold, as long as they live. For the vision concerns all their multitude; it shall not turn back. And because of his iniquity, none shall preserve his life.


14 They have blown the trumpet and made everything ready, but no one goes to battle, for my wrath is upon all their multitude.
15 The sword is outside; pestilence and famine are within. He who is in the field shall die by the sword, and he who is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.
16 And if any survivors escape, they will be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them moaning, each one over his iniquity.
17 All hands are feeble, and all knees turn to water.
18 They put on sackcloth, and horror covers them. Shame is on all faces, and baldness on all their heads.


19 They cast their silver into the streets, and their gold is treated as unclean. Their silver and gold are not able to deliver them on the day of the wrath of the LORD. They cannot satisfy their hunger or fill their stomachs with it, for it was the stumbling block of their iniquity.
20 His beautiful ornament they used for pride, and they made from it their abominable images and their detestable things. Therefore I make it an unclean thing to them.
21 And I will give it into the hand of foreigners for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth as spoil, and they shall profane it.
22 I will turn my face from them, and they shall profane my treasured place. Robbers shall enter and profane it.


23 Forge a chain, for the land is full of bloody crimes and the city is full of violence.
24 I will bring the worst of the nations, and they shall possess their houses. I will put an end to the pride of the strong, and their holy places shall be profaned.
25 Anguish comes; they seek peace, but there is none.
26 Disaster comes upon disaster; rumor follows rumor. They seek a vision from the prophet, while the law perishes from the priest and counsel from the elders.
27 The king mourns, the prince is wrapped in despair, and the hands of the common man tremble. According to their way I will deal with them, and by their judgments I will judge them. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 8


1 And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, on the fifth day of the month, as I was sitting in my house and the elders of Judah were sitting before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD fell upon me there.
2 Then I looked, and saw a form that had the appearance of a man. From what appeared to be his waist downward was fire, and from his waist upward was something like the appearance of brightness, like glowing metal.
3 And he stretched out the form of a hand and took me by a lock of my head, and the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven and brought me in visions of God to Jerusalem, to the entrance of the inner gate that faces north, where was the seat of the image of jealousy, which provokes to jealousy.
4 And I saw that the glory of the God of Israel was there, like the vision that I saw in the valley.


5 Then he said to me, “Son of man, lift up your eyes now toward the north.” So I lifted up my eyes toward the north, and saw, north of the altar gate, at the entrance, was this image of jealousy.
6 And he said to me, “Son of man, do you see what they are doing—the great abominations that the house of Israel is committing here, to drive me far from my sanctuary? But you will see still greater abominations.”


7 And he brought me to the entrance of the court, and I looked, and saw, there was a hole in the wall.
8 Then he said to me, “Son of man, dig through the wall.” So I dug through the wall, and I saw an entrance.
9 And he said to me, “Go in and see the wicked abominations that they are doing here.”
10 So I went in and looked, and I saw every form of creeping thing and detestable beast, and all the idols of the house of Israel, were carved on the wall all around.
11 And before them stood seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel, with Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan standing among them. Each had his censer in his hand, and the smoke of the cloud of incense went up.
12 Then he said to me, “Son of man, have you seen what the elders of the house of Israel are doing in the dark, each in his room of images? For they say, ‘The LORD does not see us; the LORD has forsaken the land.’”
13 He said also to me, “You will see still greater abominations that they are committing.”


14 Then he brought me to the entrance of the gate of the house of the LORD that was on the north, and I saw that women were sitting there weeping for Tammuz.
15 Then he said to me, “Have you seen this, son of man? You will see still greater abominations than these.”


16 And he brought me into the inner court of the house of the LORD, and I saw at the entrance of the temple of the LORD, between the porch and the altar, there were about twenty-five men, with their backs to the temple of the LORD and their faces toward the east, worshiping the sun toward the east.
17 Then he said to me, “Have you seen this, son of man? Is it too light a thing for the house of Judah to commit the abominations that they commit here, that they fill the land with violence and provoke me still further? They put the branch to their nose.
18 Therefore I also will act in wrath. My eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. And though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, I will not hear them.”




Chapter 9


1 Then he cried in my ears with a loud voice, saying, “Bring near the executioners of the city, each with his destroying weapon in his hand.”
2 And I saw six men coming from the direction of the upper gate, which faces north, each with his weapon for destruction in his hand. And one man among them was clothed in linen, with a writing case at his side. And they went in and stood beside the bronze altar.


3 Now the glory of the God of Israel had gone up from the cherub on which it rested to the threshold of the house. And he called to the man clothed in linen, who had the writing case at his side.
4 And the LORD said to him, “Pass through the city, through Jerusalem, and put a mark on the foreheads of the men who sigh and groan over all the abominations that are committed in it.”
5 And to the others he said in my hearing, “Pass through the city after him, and strike. Your eye shall not spare, and you shall show no pity.
6 Kill old men outright, young men and maidens, little children and women, but touch no man on whom is the mark. And begin at my sanctuary.” So they began with the elders who were before the house.


7 Then he said to them, “Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain. Go out.” So they went out and struck in the city.
8 And while they were striking, and I was left alone, I fell on my face and cried out, “Ah, Lord GOD! Will you destroy all the remnant of Israel in the outpouring of your wrath on Jerusalem?”


9 Then he said to me, “The guilt of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great. The land is full of blood, and the city full of injustice. For they say, ‘The LORD has forsaken the land, and the LORD does not see.’
10 As for me, my eye will not spare, nor will I have pity; I will bring their way upon their head.”


11 And behold, the man clothed in linen, with the writing case at his side, brought back word, saying, “I have done as you commanded me.”




Chapter 10


1 Then I looked, and saw on the expanse that was over the heads of the cherubim, there appeared above them something like a sapphire stone, in appearance resembling a throne.
2 And he spoke to the man clothed in linen and said, “Go in between the whirling wheels beneath the cherubim, and fill your hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and scatter them over the city.” And he went in as I watched.


3 Now the cherubim were standing on the south side of the house when the man went in, and the cloud filled the inner court.
4 Then the glory of the LORD rose up from above the cherub and moved to the threshold of the house, and the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was filled with the brightness of the glory of the LORD.
5 And the sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard as far as the outer court, like the voice of God Almighty when he speaks.


6 And when he commanded the man clothed in linen, saying, “Take fire from between the whirling wheels, from between the cherubim,” he went in and stood beside a wheel.
7 And the cherub stretched out his hand from among the cherubim to the fire that was between the cherubim, and took some of it and placed it into the hands of the man clothed in linen, who took it and went out.
8 And the cherubim appeared to have the form of a man’s hand under their wings.


9 And I looked, and saw four wheels beside the cherubim, one wheel beside each cherub. And the appearance of the wheels was like the gleam of a beryl stone.
10 And as for their appearance, all four had the same likeness, as if a wheel were within a wheel.
11 When they went, they went in any of their four directions without turning as they went, but in whatever direction the head faced, they followed without turning as they went.
12 And their whole body, their backs, their hands, their wings, and the wheels were full of eyes all around—the wheels belonging to all four.
13 As for the wheels, they were called in my hearing “the whirling wheels.”


14 And each one had four faces: the first face was the face of a cherub, the second face was the face of a man, the third the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
15 And the cherubim rose up—these were the living creatures that I saw by the Kebar River.


16 And when the cherubim went, the wheels went beside them. And when the cherubim lifted up their wings to rise from the earth, the wheels also did not leave their side.
17 When they stood still, these stood still, and when they rose up, these rose up with them, for the spirit of the living creatures was in them.


18 Then the glory of the LORD went out from the threshold of the house and stood over the cherubim.
19 And the cherubim lifted up their wings and rose up from the earth before my eyes as they went out, with the wheels beside them. And they stood at the entrance of the east gate of the house of the LORD, and the glory of the God of Israel was above them.


20 These were the living creatures that I saw underneath the God of Israel by the Kebar River, and I knew that they were cherubim.
21 Each one had four faces, and each had four wings, and beneath their wings was the likeness of human hands.
22 And the likeness of their faces was the same as the faces I had seen by the Kebar River, their appearance and their whole form. Each one went straight forward.




Chapter 11


1 Then the Spirit lifted me up and brought me to the east gate of the house of the LORD, which faces east. And there at the entrance of the gate were twenty-five men. And I saw among them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, officials of the people.
2 And he said to me, “Son of man, these are the men who devise wickedness and give evil counsel in this city.
3 They say, ‘The time is not near to build houses; this city is the pot, and we are the meat.’
4 Therefore prophesy against them; prophesy, son of man.”


5 And the Spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and he said to me, “Say, Thus says the LORD: So you think, O house of Israel, for I know the things that come into your spirit.
6 You have multiplied your slain in this city, and you have filled its streets with the slain.
7 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Your slain whom you have laid in its midst—they are the meat, and this city is the pot. But you shall be brought out of the midst of it.
8 You have feared the sword, and I will bring the sword upon you, declares the Lord GOD.
9 And I will bring you out of the midst of it and give you into the hands of foreigners, and I will execute judgment upon you.
10 You shall fall by the sword. I will judge you at the border of Israel, and you shall know that I am the LORD.
11 This city shall not be your pot, nor shall you be the meat in the midst of it. I will judge you at the border of Israel,
12 and you shall know that I am the LORD, for you have not walked in my statutes, nor obeyed my judgments, but have acted according to the judgments of the nations that are around you.”


13 And it came to pass, while I was prophesying, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then I fell on my face and cried out with a loud voice and said, “Ah, Lord GOD! Will you make a complete end of the remnant of Israel?”


14 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
15 “Son of man, your brothers, your kinsmen, your fellow exiles, and all the house of Israel—all of them—are those of whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, ‘Stay far from the LORD; to us this land is given as a possession.’
16 Therefore say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Though I removed them far off among the nations, and though I scattered them among the countries, yet I have been a sanctuary to them for a little while in the countries where they have gone.


17 Therefore say, Thus says the Lord GOD: I will gather you from the peoples and assemble you from the countries where you have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
18 And they will come there and remove from it all its detestable things and all its abominations.
19 And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within them. I will remove the heart of stone from their flesh and give them a heart of flesh,
20 that they may walk in my statutes and keep my judgments and do them. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
21 But as for those whose heart goes after their detestable things and their abominations, I will bring their way down upon their own heads, declares the Lord GOD.”


22 Then the cherubim lifted up their wings, with the wheels beside them, and the glory of the God of Israel was over them.
23 And the glory of the LORD went up from the midst of the city and stood on the mountain that is east of the city.


24 And the Spirit lifted me up and brought me in a vision by the Spirit of God to Chaldea, to the exiles. Then the vision that I had seen went up from me.
25 And I told the exiles all the things that the LORD had shown me.




Chapter 12


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, you dwell in the midst of a rebellious house, who have eyes to see but do not see, and ears to hear but do not hear, for they are a rebellious house.
3 As for you, son of man, prepare for yourself baggage for exile, and go into exile by day in their sight. You shall go into exile from your place to another place in their sight. Perhaps they will understand, though they are a rebellious house.


4 You shall bring out your baggage by day in their sight, as baggage for exile. Then in the evening you shall go out in their sight, as those do who go into exile.
5 In their sight, dig through the wall and bring your baggage out through it.
6 In their sight, you shall lift the baggage on your shoulder and carry it out in the dark. You shall cover your face so that you cannot see the land, for I have made you a sign for the house of Israel.”


7 So I did as I was commanded. I brought out my baggage by day as baggage for exile, and in the evening I dug through the wall with my hand. In darkness I brought it out; I lifted it on my shoulder in their sight.


8 And in the morning the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
9 “Son of man, has not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said to you, ‘What are you doing?’
10 Say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: This oracle concerns the prince in Jerusalem and all the house of Israel who are in it.
11 Say, ‘I am a sign for you: as I have done, so shall it be done to them. They shall go into exile, into captivity.’
12 And the prince who is among them shall lift his baggage on his shoulder in the dark and go out. They shall dig through the wall to bring it out. He shall cover his face so that he cannot see the land with his eyes.
13 And I will spread my net over him, and he shall be caught in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon, the land of the Chaldeans, yet he shall not see it, and there he shall die.
14 And I will scatter toward every wind all who are around him, his helpers and all his troops, and I will unsheathe the sword after them.


15 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I disperse them among the nations and scatter them among the countries.
16 But I will let a few of them escape from the sword, from famine, and from pestilence, so that they may declare all their abominations among the nations where they go, and they shall know that I am the LORD.”


17 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, eat your bread with quaking, and drink your water with trembling and anxiety.
19 And say to the people of the land, Thus says the Lord GOD concerning the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the land of Israel: They shall eat their bread with anxiety and drink their water with horror, so that her land may be emptied of all who are in it because of the violence of all who dwell in it.
20 And the inhabited cities shall be laid waste, and the land shall become a desolation, and you shall know that I am the LORD.”


21 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
22 “Son of man, what is this proverb that you have in the land of Israel, saying, ‘The days are prolonged, and every vision fails’?
23 Therefore say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: I will put an end to this proverb, and they shall no longer use it as a proverb in Israel. But say to them, ‘The days are near, and the fulfillment of every vision.’
24 For there shall no longer be any false vision or flattering divination within the house of Israel.
25 For I am the LORD; I will speak whatever word I speak, and it shall be fulfilled. It will no longer be delayed, but in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak the word and fulfill it, declares the Lord GOD.”


26 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
27 “Son of man, behold, the house of Israel is saying, ‘The vision that he sees is for many days from now, and he prophesies of times far off.’
28 Therefore say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: None of my words will be delayed any longer, but the word that I speak will be fulfilled, declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 13


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel who are prophesying, and say to those who prophesy out of their own hearts, ‘Hear the word of the LORD!’
3 Thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the foolish prophets who follow their own spirit and have seen nothing!
4 Your prophets, O Israel, are like foxes among ruins.
5 You have not gone up into the breaches or built up a wall for the house of Israel, that it might stand in the battle on the day of the LORD.


6 They have seen false visions and lying divinations. They say, ‘Declares the LORD,’ when the LORD has not sent them, and yet they expect him to fulfill their word.
7 Have you not seen a false vision and uttered a lying divination, whenever you have said, ‘Declares the LORD,’ although I have not spoken?”


8 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have spoken falsehood and seen lying visions, therefore, I am against you, declares the Lord GOD.
9 My hand will be against the prophets who see false visions and utter lying divinations. They shall not be in the council of my people, nor be enrolled in the register of the house of Israel, nor shall they enter the land of Israel. Then you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.


10 Because they have led my people astray, saying, ‘Peace,’ when there is no peace, and because, when the people build a wall, they smear it with whitewash,
11 say to those who smear it with whitewash that it shall fall. There will be a deluge of rain, and you, O hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind shall break out.
12 And when the wall falls, will it not be said to you, ‘Where is the coating with which you smeared it?’


13 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I will make a stormy wind break out in my wrath, and there shall be a deluge of rain in my anger, and hailstones in wrath to make a full end.
14 And I will break down the wall that you have smeared with whitewash, and bring it down to the ground, so that its foundation will be laid bare. When it falls, you shall perish in its midst, and you shall know that I am the LORD.
15 Thus will I spend my wrath upon the wall and upon those who have smeared it with whitewash. And I will say to you, ‘The wall is no more, nor those who smeared it,
16 the prophets of Israel who prophesied concerning Jerusalem and saw visions of peace for her, when there was no peace,’ declares the Lord GOD.


17 And you, son of man, set your face against the daughters of your people who prophesy out of their own hearts. Prophesy against them
18 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the women who sew magic bands upon all wrists and make veils for the heads of persons of every height in order to hunt souls! Will you hunt the souls belonging to my people and keep your own souls alive?
19 You have profaned me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, putting to death souls who should not die and keeping alive souls who should not live, by your lying to my people who listen to lies.


20 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against your magic bands with which you hunt the souls like birds, and I will tear them from your arms, and I will let the souls you hunt go free—the souls like birds.
21 Your veils also I will tear off and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall no longer be in your hand as prey. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.


22 Because you have disheartened the righteous falsely, though I have not grieved him, and you have strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not turn from his evil way to save his life,
23 therefore you shall no longer see false visions or practice divination. I will deliver my people out of your hand, and you shall know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 14


1 Then certain men from the elders of Israel came to me and sat before me.
2 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
3 “Son of man, these men have taken their idols into their hearts and have put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their faces. Should I indeed let myself be consulted by them?


4 Therefore speak to them and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Any man of the house of Israel who takes his idols into his heart and sets the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face and comes to the prophet—I the LORD will answer him according to it, according to the multitude of his idols,
5 in order to seize the house of Israel in their hearts, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.


6 Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: Repent and turn away from your idols, and turn your faces away from all your abominations.
7 For any one of the house of Israel or of the sojourners who dwell in Israel, who separates himself from me, takes his idols into his heart, and sets the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to a prophet to inquire of me through him—I the LORD will answer him myself.
8 And I will set my face against that man, and I will make him a sign and a proverb and cut him off from the midst of my people. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.


9 And if the prophet is deceived and speaks a word, I the LORD have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand against him and destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.
10 They shall bear their punishment—the punishment of the inquirer shall be the same as the punishment of the prophet—
11 that the house of Israel may no longer go astray from me, nor defile themselves anymore with all their transgressions. Then they shall be my people, and I will be their God, declares the Lord GOD.”


12 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
13 “Son of man, if a land sins against me by acting unfaithfully, and I stretch out my hand against it and break its supply of bread and send famine upon it and cut off from it man and beast,
14 even if these three men—Noah, Daniel, and Job—were in it, they would deliver only themselves by their righteousness, declares the Lord GOD.


15 If I cause wild beasts to pass through the land and they bereave it so that it becomes a desolation, with no one passing through because of the beasts,
16 even though these three men were in it, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters. They alone would be delivered, but the land would be a desolation.


17 Or if I bring a sword upon that land and say, ‘Let a sword pass through the land,’ and I cut off from it man and beast,
18 even though these three men were in it, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they alone would be delivered.


19 Or if I send a pestilence into that land and pour out my wrath upon it with blood, to cut off from it man and beast,
20 even though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, they would deliver neither son nor daughter. They would deliver only themselves by their righteousness.


21 For thus says the Lord GOD: How much more when I send upon Jerusalem my four disastrous judgments—sword, famine, wild beasts, and pestilence—to cut off from it man and beast!
22 Yet you will see, there shall be left in it survivors, sons and daughters who will be brought out. See how they will come out to you, and you will see their way and their deeds. Then you will be comforted for the disaster that I have brought upon Jerusalem, for all that I have brought upon it.
23 And they will comfort you when you see their way and their deeds, and you shall know that I have not done without cause all that I have done in it, declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 15


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, how is the wood of the vine better than any wood, the vine branch that is among the trees of the forest?
3 Is wood taken from it to make anything? Do they take a peg from it to hang any vessel on it?
4 See, it is given to the fire for fuel. The fire consumes both its ends, and its middle is charred. Is it useful for any work?
5 See, when it was whole, it was not used for any work. How much less, when the fire has consumed it and it is charred, can it still be used for anything?


6 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Like the wood of the vine among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so I will give up the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
7 And I will set my face against them. Though they escape from the fire, the fire shall yet consume them. Then you shall know that I am the LORD, when I set my face against them.
8 And I will make the land desolate, because they have acted unfaithfully, declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 16


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, make known to Jerusalem her abominations,
3 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD to Jerusalem: Your origin and your birth are from the land of the Canaanites. Your father was an Amorite and your mother a Hittite.
4 As for your birth, on the day you were born, your cord was not cut, nor were you washed with water to cleanse you, nor were you rubbed with salt or wrapped in cloth strips.
5 No eye pitied you, to do any of these things to you out of compassion. You were thrown out into the open field, for you were abhorred on the day you were born.


6 And when I passed by you and saw you wallowing in your blood, I said to you in your blood, ‘Live!’ I said to you in your blood, ‘Live!’
7 I made you flourish like a plant of the field. And you grew up and became tall and reached full adornment. Your breasts were formed, and your hair had grown, yet you were naked and bare.
8 Then I passed by you again and saw you, and behold, you were at the time for love. And I spread the corner of my garment over you and covered your nakedness. I swore to you and entered into a covenant with you, declares the Lord GOD, and you became mine.


9 Then I bathed you with water and washed off your blood from you and anointed you with oil.
10 I clothed you with embroidered cloth and put sandals of fine leather on your feet. I bound you with fine linen and covered you with silk.
11 And I adorned you with ornaments and put bracelets on your wrists and a chain on your neck.
12 I put a ring on your nose and earrings in your ears and a beautiful crown on your head.
13 Thus you were adorned with gold and silver, and your clothing was of fine linen and silk and embroidered cloth. You ate fine flour and honey and oil. You became exceedingly beautiful and advanced to royal splendor.
14 And your fame went out among the nations because of your beauty, for it was perfect through my splendor, which I had bestowed on you, declares the Lord GOD.


15 But you trusted in your beauty and played the harlot because of your fame, and poured out your whorings on every passerby. Your beauty became his.
16 And you took some of your garments and made for yourself colorful shrines and played the harlot on them—things such as never have been nor ever shall be.
17 You also took your beautiful jewelry of my gold and of my silver, which I had given you, and made for yourself images of males and played the harlot with them.
18 And you took your embroidered garments to cover them and set my oil and my incense before them.
19 Also my bread that I gave you—I fed you with fine flour and oil and honey—you set it before them for a pleasing aroma. And so it was, declares the Lord GOD.


20 And you took your sons and your daughters, whom you had borne to me, and these you sacrificed to them to be devoured. Were your whorings so small a matter
21 that you slaughtered my children and delivered them up as an offering by fire to them?
22 And in all your abominations and your whorings you did not remember the days of your youth, when you were naked and bare, wallowing in your blood.


23 And after all your wickedness—woe, woe to you! declares the Lord GOD—
24 you built yourself a vaulted chamber and made yourself a high place in every square.
25 At the head of every street you built your high place and made your beauty an abomination. You spread your legs to every passerby and multiplied your whorings.
26 You also played the harlot with the Egyptians, your lustful neighbors, and multiplied your whorings to provoke me to anger.
27 See, therefore, how I stretched out my hand against you and diminished your portion and gave you over to the greed of your enemies, the daughters of the Philistines, who were ashamed of your lewd behavior.


28 You played the harlot also with the Assyrians, because you were not satisfied. Yes, you played the harlot with them, and still you were not satisfied.
29 You multiplied your whorings also with the land of traders, Chaldea, and even with this you were not satisfied.
30 How sick is your heart, declares the Lord GOD, when you do all these things, the work of a brazen prostitute,
31 building your vaulted chamber at the head of every street, and making your high place in every square. Yet you were not like a harlot, because you scorned payment.
32 You adulterous wife, who receives strangers instead of her husband!


33 Men give gifts to all harlots, but you gave your gifts to all your lovers and bribed them to come to you from every direction in your whorings.
34 So you were different from other women in your whorings; no one solicited you to play the harlot. You gave payment, and no payment was given to you; thus you were the opposite.


35 Therefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD:
36 Thus says the Lord GOD, Because your filthiness was poured out and your nakedness uncovered through your whorings with your lovers and with all your detestable idols, and because of the blood of your children that you gave to them,
37 therefore, see how I will gather all your lovers with whom you took pleasure, all those you loved and all those you hated. I will gather them against you from every side and will uncover your nakedness to them, and they shall see all your nakedness.
38 And I will judge you as women who commit adultery and shed blood are judged, and I will bring upon you the blood of wrath and jealousy.


39 And I will give you into their hands, and they shall throw down your vaulted chamber and break down your high places. They shall strip you of your clothes and take your beautiful jewels and leave you naked and bare.
40 They shall bring up a crowd against you, and they shall stone you and cut you to pieces with their swords.
41 And they shall burn your houses with fire and execute judgments on you in the sight of many women. Then I will make you cease from playing the harlot, and you shall also give payment no more.


42 So I will satisfy my wrath on you, and my jealousy shall turn away from you. I will be calm and will no longer be angry.
43 Because you have not remembered the days of your youth, but have enraged me with all these things, see, I also will bring your way down on your own head, declares the Lord GOD. Have you not committed lewdness in addition to all your abominations?


44 Look how everyone who uses proverbs will use this proverb about you, saying, ‘Like mother, like daughter.’
45 You are the daughter of your mother, who loathed her husband and her children. And you are the sister of your sisters, who loathed their husbands and their children. Your mother was a Hittite and your father an Amorite.


46 And your elder sister is Samaria, who lived with her daughters to the north of you; and your younger sister, who lived to the south of you, is Sodom with her daughters.
47 Yet you have not walked in their ways nor acted according to their abominations; but, as if that were too little, you were more corrupt than they in all your ways.
48 As I live, declares the Lord GOD, your sister Sodom and her daughters have not done as you and your daughters have done.


49 Look here! This was the guilt of your sister Sodom: pride, excess of food, and prosperous ease were hers and her daughters', but she did not strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.
50 And they were haughty and did an abomination before me. So I removed them when I saw it.


51 Samaria has not committed half your sins. You have multiplied your abominations beyond theirs and have made your sisters appear righteous by all the abominations that you have done.
52 Bear your disgrace, you also, for you have made judgment favorable to your sisters. Because of your sins in which you acted more abominably than they, they are more in the right than you. So be ashamed, you also, and bear your disgrace, for you have justified your sisters.


53 I will restore their fortunes, the fortunes of Sodom and her daughters and the fortunes of Samaria and her daughters, and I will restore your fortunes among them,
54 that you may bear your disgrace and be ashamed of all that you have done, becoming a consolation to them.
55 Your sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former state, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former state, and you and your daughters shall return to your former state.
56 Was not your sister Sodom a byword in your mouth in the day of your pride,
57 before your wickedness was uncovered? Now you are a reproach to the daughters of Syria and all those around her, and to the daughters of the Philistines, those all around who despise you.


58 You bear the penalty of your lewdness and your abominations, declares the LORD.
59 For thus says the Lord GOD: I will deal with you as you have done, you who have despised the oath, breaking the covenant.


60 Yet I will remember my covenant with you in the days of your youth, and I will establish for you an everlasting covenant.
61 Then you will remember your ways and be ashamed, when you receive your sisters, both your elder and your younger, and I give them to you as daughters—but not because of your covenant.
62 I will establish my covenant with you, and you shall know that I am the LORD,
63 that you may remember and be ashamed and never open your mouth again because of your disgrace, when I atone for you for all that you have done, declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 17


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, propose a riddle and speak a parable to the house of Israel,
3 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD: A great eagle with great wings and long pinions, rich in plumage of many colors, came to Lebanon and took the top of the cedar.
4 He plucked off the topmost of its young twigs and brought it to a land of merchants; he set it in a city of traders.
5 Then he took some of the seed of the land and planted it in fertile soil. He placed it beside abundant waters. He set it like a willow twig,
6 and it sprouted and became a low spreading vine. Its branches turned toward him, and its roots were under him. So it became a vine and produced branches and put out boughs.


7 But there was another great eagle with great wings and much plumage. And this vine bent its roots toward him and sent its branches toward him from the bed where it was planted, that he might water it.
8 It had been planted in good soil by abundant waters, that it might produce branches and bear fruit and become a noble vine.
9 Say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Will it thrive? Will he not pull up its roots and cut off its fruit, so that it withers—so that all its fresh sprouts wither? It will not take a strong arm or many people to pull it from its roots.
10 See, it is planted, but will it thrive? Will it not utterly wither when the east wind strikes it? Wither away on the bed where it grew?”


11 Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
12 “Say now to the rebellious house, Do you not know what these things mean? Tell them, See, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem and took its king and princes and brought them to him in Babylon.
13 And he took one of the royal offspring and made a covenant with him, putting him under oath. He also took away the mighty of the land,
14 that the kingdom might be brought low and not lift itself up, and that by keeping his covenant it might stand.
15 But he rebelled against him by sending his ambassadors to Egypt, that they might give him horses and a large army. Will he succeed? Can one who does such things escape? Can he break the covenant and yet escape?


16 As I live, declares the Lord GOD, surely in the place where the king dwells who made him king, whose oath he despised and whose covenant he broke—in Babylon he shall die.
17 Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company will not help him in war, when mounds are cast up and siege walls built to cut off many lives.
18 He despised the oath by breaking the covenant, and he gave his hand and did all these things—he shall not escape.
19 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: As I live, surely it is my oath that he despised and my covenant that he broke—I will bring it down on his own head.
20 And I will spread my net over him, and he shall be taken in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon and enter into judgment with him there for the treachery he has committed against me.
21 And all the choice men in all his troops shall fall by the sword, and the survivors shall be scattered to every wind. Then you shall know that I am the LORD; I have spoken.”


22 Thus says the Lord GOD: I myself will take a sprig from the lofty top of the cedar and will plant it. I will pluck from the topmost of its young twigs a tender one, and I myself will plant it on a high and lofty mountain.
23 On the mountain height of Israel I will plant it, that it may bear branches and produce fruit and become a noble cedar. And under it will dwell every kind of bird; in the shade of its branches birds of every sort will nest.
24 And all the trees of the field shall know that I am the LORD. I bring low the high tree, and exalt the low tree, dry up the green tree, and make the dry tree flourish. I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it.”




Chapter 18


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “What do you mean by using this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, ‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the teeth of the sons are set on edge’?
3 As I live, declares the Lord GOD, you shall no longer use this proverb in Israel.
4 All lives are mine, the life of the father as well as the life of the son is mine. The soul who sins shall die.


5 But if a man is righteous and does what is just and right,
6 if he does not eat upon the mountains or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, does not defile his neighbor’s wife or approach a woman during her impurity,
7 does not oppress anyone, but returns his pledge, commits no robbery, gives his bread to the hungry and covers the naked with a garment,
8 does not lend at interest or take any profit, withholds his hand from injustice, executes true justice between man and man,
9 walks in my statutes and keeps my judgments to act faithfully—he is righteous; he shall surely live, declares the Lord GOD.


10 If he fathers a son who is violent, a shedder of blood, and who does any of these things—
11 though he himself did none of these things—who even eats upon the mountains, defiles his neighbor’s wife,
12 oppresses the poor and needy, commits robbery, does not return the pledge, lifts up his eyes to idols, commits abomination,
13 lends at interest and takes profit—shall the son then live? He shall not live. He has done all these abominations; he shall surely die. His blood shall be upon himself.


14 But see here, if this man fathers a son who sees all the sins that his father has done and considers and does not do likewise—
15 who does not eat upon the mountains or lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, does not defile his neighbor’s wife,
16 does not oppress anyone, exacts no pledge, commits no robbery, gives his bread to the hungry and covers the naked with a garment,
17 withholds his hand from wrongdoing, takes no interest or profit, keeps my judgments and walks in my statutes—he shall not die for his father's iniquity; he shall surely live.
18 As for his father, because he practiced extortion, robbed his brother, and did what is not good among his people, he shall die for his own iniquity.


19 Yet you say, ‘Why does not the son bear the guilt of the father?’ When the son has done what is just and right, and has kept all my statutes and acted faithfully, he shall surely live.
20 The soul who sins shall die. The son shall not bear the guilt of the father, nor shall the father bear the guilt of the son. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.


21 But if the wicked turns from all his sins that he has committed and keeps all my statutes and does what is just and right, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
22 None of the transgressions that he has committed shall be remembered against him; for the righteousness that he has done, he shall live.
23 Do I take any pleasure in the death of the wicked, declares the Lord GOD, rather than that he should turn from his ways and live?


24 But if a righteous man turns away from his righteousness and commits injustice, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? None of the righteous deeds that he has done shall be remembered. For the unfaithfulness of which he is guilty, and for the sin he has committed, he shall die.


25 Yet you say, ‘The way of the LORD is not just.’ Hear now, O house of Israel: Is my way not just? Is it not your ways that are not just?
26 When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness and commits injustice, and dies for it, for the injustice that he has done he shall die.
27 Again, when a wicked man turns away from the wickedness he has committed and does what is just and right, he shall save his life.
28 Because he considered and turned away from all the transgressions that he had committed, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
29 Yet the house of Israel says, ‘The way of the LORD is not just.’ O house of Israel, are my ways not just? Is it not your ways that are not just?


30 Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, each one according to his ways, declares the Lord GOD. Repent and turn from all your transgressions, lest iniquity be your downfall.
31 Cast away from you all the transgressions that you have committed, and make yourselves a new heart and a new spirit. Why will you die, O house of Israel?
32 For I have no pleasure in the death of anyone who dies, declares the Lord GOD. Therefore, turn and live.”




Chapter 19


1 And you, take up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,
2 and say: What was your mother? A lioness. Among lions she lay down; in the midst of young lions she raised her cubs.
3 And she brought up one of her cubs; he became a young lion. He learned to tear the prey; he devoured men.
4 Then the nations heard of him; he was caught in their pit, and they brought him with hooks to the land of Egypt.


5 When she saw that she waited in vain, that her hope was lost, she took another of her cubs and made him a young lion.
6 And he prowled among the lions; he became a young lion, and he learned to tear the prey; he devoured men.
7 And he ravaged strongholds and laid waste their cities. The land was appalled and all who were in it, at the sound of his roaring.
8 Then the nations set against him from the provinces on every side. They spread their net over him; he was taken in their pit.
9 With hooks they put him in a cage and brought him to the king of Babylon. They brought him into strongholds, so that his voice should no more be heard on the mountains of Israel.


10 Your mother was like a vine in your likeness, planted by the waters. She was fruitful and full of branches by reason of abundant water.
11 And she had strong branches, fit for scepters of rulers, and her height was exalted among the clouds. It was seen in its height with the mass of its branches.
12 But it was plucked up in fury, cast down to the ground. The east wind dried up its fruit; its strong branch was torn off and withered; fire consumed it.
13 Now it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.
14 And fire has gone out from the rod of its branches; it has consumed its fruit, so that there is no strong branch in it, a scepter for ruling.


This is a lamentation and has become a lamentation.




Chapter 20


1 And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, on the tenth day of the month, that certain men from the elders of Israel came to inquire of the LORD, and they sat before me.
2 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
3 “Son of man, speak to the elders of Israel and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Have you come to inquire of me? As I live, I will not be inquired of by you, declares the Lord GOD.


4 Will you judge them, son of man, will you judge them? Make known to them the abominations of their fathers,
5 and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: On the day when I chose Israel, I lifted up my hand to the seed of the house of Jacob and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt. I lifted up my hand to them, saying, I am the LORD your God.
6 On that day I lifted up my hand to them, that I would bring them out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, a land flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.
7 And I said to them, Cast away every man the detestable things of his eyes, and do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt. I am the LORD your God.
8 But they rebelled against me and were not willing to listen to me. They did not each cast away the detestable things of their eyes, nor did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them to complete my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
9 But I acted for the sake of my name, that it should not be profaned in the eyes of the nations among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself known to them, in bringing them out of the land of Egypt.


10 So I brought them out of the land of Egypt and led them into the wilderness.
11 And I gave them my statutes and made known to them my judgments, by which, if a man does them, he shall live.
12 Moreover, I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD who sanctifies them.
13 But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes and they rejected my judgments—by which, if a man does them, he shall live—and they greatly profaned my Sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them in the wilderness, to make a complete end of them.
14 But I acted for the sake of my name, that it should not be profaned before the nations in whose sight I had brought them out.


15 I also lifted up my hand to them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land that I had given them—a land flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands—
16 because they rejected my judgments and did not walk in my statutes, and profaned my Sabbaths, for their heart went after their idols.
17 Yet my eye spared them from destruction, and I did not make a complete end of them in the wilderness.


18 And I said to their children in the wilderness, Do not walk in the statutes of your fathers, nor keep their judgments, nor defile yourselves with their idols.
19 I am the LORD your God. Walk in my statutes, keep my judgments, and do them.
20 And sanctify my Sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that you may know that I am the LORD your God.
21 But the children rebelled against me. They did not walk in my statutes, nor did they keep my judgments to do them (by which, if a man does them, he shall live). They profaned my Sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.
22 Nevertheless, I withdrew my hand and acted for the sake of my name, that it should not be profaned in the eyes of the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.


23 Also I lifted up my hand to them in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations and disperse them among the lands,
24 because they had not done my judgments, but had rejected my statutes and profaned my Sabbaths, and their eyes were fixed on their fathers' idols.
25 So I gave them statutes that were not good and judgments by which they could not live,
26 and I defiled them through their gifts, in making all their firstborn pass through the fire, that I might devastate them, in order that they might know that I am the LORD.


27 Therefore, son of man, speak to the house of Israel and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: In this also your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have been unfaithful to me.
28 For when I had brought them into the land that I lifted up my hand to give them, then they saw every high hill and every leafy tree, and there they offered their sacrifices and presented the provocation of their offering. There also they made their sweet aroma and poured out their drink offerings.
29 Then I said to them, What is this high place to which you go? So its name is called Bamah to this day.


30 Therefore say to the house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: Will you defile yourselves in the manner of your fathers and go whoring after their detestable things?
31 And when you offer your gifts and make your sons pass through the fire, you defile yourselves with all your idols to this day. So shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will not be inquired of by you.


32 And what comes into your mind shall never happen, when you say, ‘We will be like the nations, like the families of the lands, serving wood and stone.’


33 As I live, declares the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with wrath poured out I will be king over you.
34 And I will bring you out from the peoples and gather you from the lands where you are scattered, with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and with wrath poured out.
35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples, and there I will enter into judgment with you face to face.
36 Just as I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, declares the Lord GOD.
37 And I will make you pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
38 And I will purge out from among you the rebels and those who transgress against me. I will bring them out from the land where they sojourn, but they shall not enter the land of Israel. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.


39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus says the Lord GOD: Go, serve every one of you his idols, now and hereafter—if you will not listen to me—but my holy name you shall no longer profane with your gifts and with your idols.


40 For on my holy mountain, on the mountain height of Israel, declares the Lord GOD, there all the house of Israel, all of them, shall serve me in the land. There I will accept them, and there I will require your contributions and the choicest of your gifts, with all your holy things.
41 As a pleasing aroma I will accept you, when I bring you out from the peoples and gather you out of the lands where you have been scattered. And I will be sanctified through you in the sight of the nations.
42 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I bring you into the land of Israel, into the land that I lifted up my hand to give to your fathers.
43 And there you shall remember your ways and all your deeds by which you have defiled yourselves, and you shall loathe yourselves for all the evils that you have done.
44 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I deal with you for the sake of my name, not according to your evil ways or according to your corrupt deeds, O house of Israel, declares the Lord GOD.”


45 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
46 “Son of man, set your face toward the south, and preach against the south, and prophesy against the forest land of the Negev.
47 And say to the forest of the Negev, Hear the word of the LORD: Thus says the Lord GOD, I will kindle a fire in you, and it shall devour every green tree in you and every dry tree. The blazing flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from south to north shall be scorched by it.
48 And all flesh shall see that I, the LORD, have kindled it; it shall not be quenched.”
49 Then I said, “Ah, Lord GOD! They say of me, ‘Is he not speaking parables?’”




Chapter 21


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face toward Jerusalem, and preach against the sanctuaries, and prophesy against the land of Israel.
3 And say to the land of Israel, Thus says the LORD: Pay attention here! I am against you and will draw my sword from its sheath and will cut off from you both righteous and wicked.
4 Because I will cut off from you both righteous and wicked, therefore my sword shall go out from its sheath against all flesh from south to north.
5 And all flesh shall know that I the LORD have drawn my sword from its sheath; it shall not return anymore.


6 And you, son of man, groan with shaking loins, and with bitterness groan before their eyes.
7 And when they say to you, ‘Why do you groan?’ you shall say, ‘Because of the report that is coming. Every heart will melt, and all hands will be feeble, every spirit will faint, and all knees will be weak as water. Look! It is coming, and it will be fulfilled,’ declares the Lord GOD.”


8 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
9 “Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus says the LORD: Say,


A sword, a sword is sharpened and also polished,
10 sharpened to make a great slaughter,
polished that it may flash like lightning!


Shall we rejoice? You have despised the rod, my son, with everything of wood.
11 So the sword is given to be polished, that it may be grasped in the hand. It is sharpened and polished to be put in the hand of the slayer.
12 Cry and wail, son of man, for it is against my people; it is against all the princes of Israel. They are delivered over to the sword with my people. Therefore strike your thigh.


13 For it is a test, and what if even the rod that despises shall be no more? declares the Lord GOD.
14 And you, son of man, prophesy and strike your hands together. Let the sword be doubled the third time. It is the sword of the slain. It is the sword of the great slaughter, surrounding them.
15 That their hearts may melt and many stumble. At all their gates I have set the point of the sword. Ah! It is made like lightning; it is sharpened for slaughter.


16 Gather yourself. Go to the right, set yourself; or go to the left, wherever your edge is directed.
17 I also will strike my hands together, and I will satisfy my wrath. I the LORD have spoken.”


18 And the word of the LORD came to me again, saying,
19 “As for you, son of man, mark out two ways for the sword of the king of Babylon to come. Both shall come out of the same land. And make a signpost; make it at the head of the road to the city.
20 Mark a way for the sword to come to Rabbah of the sons of Ammon and to fortified Jerusalem in Judah.
21 For the king of Babylon stands at the parting of the way, at the head of the two roads, to practice divination. He shakes the arrows, he consults the household idols, he looks at the liver.
22 In his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem: to set battering rams, to open the mouth for slaughter, to lift the voice with a battle cry, to set battering rams against the gates, to cast up ramps, to build a siege wall.
23 But to them it will seem like false divination—they have sworn oaths—but he will bring their guilt to remembrance, that they may be taken.


24 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Because you have made your guilt to be remembered, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so that your sins are seen in all your deeds—because you have come to remembrance, you shall be taken in hand.
25 And you, O profane, wicked prince of Israel, whose day, the time of the final punishment, has come—
26 thus says the Lord GOD: Remove the turban and take off the crown. Things shall not remain as they are. Exalt what is low, and bring low what is high.
27 A ruin, a ruin, a ruin I will make it. This also shall not be, until he comes—the one to whom judgment belongs—and I will give it to him.


28 And you, son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD concerning the sons of Ammon and concerning their reproach. Say,


A sword, a sword is drawn for the slaughter,
it is polished to consume and to flash like lightning—
29 while they see for you false visions,
while they divine lies for you—
to place you on the necks of the profane wicked,
whose day has come, the time of final punishment.


30 Return it to its sheath.
In the place where you were created,
in the land of your origin,
I will judge you.
31 And I will pour out my indignation upon you;
I will blow upon you with the fire of my wrath,
and I will give you into the hands of brutal men,
skilled to destroy.
32 You shall be fuel for the fire;
your blood shall be in the midst of the land;
you shall be remembered no more,
for I the LORD have spoken.”




Chapter 22


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Now you, son of man, will you judge, will you judge the city of blood? Then you shall make known to her all her abominations.
3 And you shall say, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD: A city that sheds blood in her midst, that her time may come, and that makes idols for herself to defile herself!
4 You have become guilty by the blood that you have shed, and defiled by the idols that you have made. And you have brought your days near and have come to your years. Therefore I have made you a reproach to the nations and a mockery to all the lands.
5 Those who are near and those who are far from you will mock you, O defiled of name, full of tumult.


6 Behold, the princes of Israel, every one according to his power, have been in you to shed blood.
7 Father and mother are treated with contempt in you; the sojourner suffers extortion in your midst; the fatherless and the widow are wronged in you.
8 You have despised my holy things and have profaned my Sabbaths.
9 Slanderous men are in you to shed blood, and in you they eat on the mountains; in your midst they commit lewdness.
10 In you a man uncovers his father's nakedness; in you they violate a woman during her impurity.
11 One commits abominations with his neighbor’s wife; another lewdly defiles his daughter-in-law; another violates his sister, his father's daughter.
12 In you they take bribes to shed blood; you take interest and profit and make gain of your neighbors by extortion. But me you have forgotten,’ declares the Lord GOD.


13 ‘Behold, I strike my hand at your dishonest gain that you have made, and at the blood that has been in your midst.
14 Can your heart endure, or can your hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with you? I the LORD have spoken, and I will do it.
15 And I will scatter you among the nations and disperse you through the lands, and I will consume your uncleanness from you.
16 And you shall be profaned in yourself in the sight of the nations, and you shall know that I am the LORD.’”


17 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, the house of Israel has become dross to me; all of them are bronze and tin and iron and lead in the midst of the furnace—they are dross of silver.
19 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: ‘Because you have all become dross, therefore, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem.
20 As one gathers silver and bronze and iron and lead and tin into the midst of a furnace, to blow fire on it in order to melt it, so I will gather you in my anger and in my wrath, and I will put you there and melt you.
21 I will gather you and blow on you with the fire of my wrath, and you shall be melted in the midst of it.
22 As silver is melted in the midst of a furnace, so you shall be melted in the midst of it, and you shall know that I the LORD have poured out my wrath upon you.’”


23 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
24 “Son of man, say to her, ‘You are a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
25 The conspiracy of her prophets in her midst is like a roaring lion tearing the prey. They have devoured lives, they take treasure and precious things, they have made many widows in her midst.
26 Her priests have done violence to my law and have profaned my holy things. They have made no distinction between the holy and the common, neither have they taught the difference between the unclean and the clean, and they have hidden their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
27 Her princes in her midst are like wolves tearing the prey, shedding blood, destroying lives to get dishonest gain.
28 And her prophets have daubed them with whitewash, seeing false visions and divining lies for them, saying, “Thus says the Lord GOD, when the LORD has not spoken.”
29 The people of the land have practiced extortion and committed robbery. They have oppressed the poor and needy and have extorted from the sojourner without justice.


30 And I sought for a man among them who would build up the wall and stand in the breach before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none.
31 Therefore I have poured out my indignation upon them. I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath. I have returned their way upon their heads, declares the Lord GOD.’”




Chapter 23


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother.
3 They prostituted themselves in Egypt; they prostituted themselves in their youth. There their breasts were pressed, and there their virgin bosoms were handled.
4 Their names were Oholah the elder and Oholibah her sister. And they became mine and bore sons and daughters. As for their names: Oholah is Samaria, and Oholibah is Jerusalem.


5 Oholah prostituted herself while she was mine, and she lusted after her lovers, the Assyrians, warriors
6 clothed in blue, governors and officials, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding on horses.
7 She bestowed her harlotries upon them, the choicest men of Assyria all of them, and with all whom she lusted after; with all their idols she defiled herself.
8 She did not give up her harlotries that she had begun in Egypt, for in her youth men had lain with her and handled her virgin bosom and poured out their whoring upon her.


9 Therefore I gave her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, after whom she lusted.
10 They uncovered her nakedness, they took her sons and daughters, and they killed her with the sword. And she became a byword among women, when judgment had been executed on her.


11 Her sister Oholibah saw it, yet she was more corrupt in her lust than she, and her whoring was worse than the whoring of her sister.
12 She lusted after the Assyrians, governors and officials, warriors clothed in full armor, horsemen riding on horses, all of them desirable young men.
13 And I saw that she was defiled; they both went the same way.
14 But she carried her whorings still further. She saw men portrayed on the wall, images of the Chaldeans portrayed in vermilion,
15 wearing belts on their waists, with flowing turbans on their heads, all of them having the appearance of officers, like Babylonians whose native land was Chaldea.
16 When she saw them, she lusted after them and sent messengers to them in Chaldea.
17 And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they defiled her with their lust. And after she was defiled by them, she turned from them in disgust.
18 When she carried on her whoring openly and exposed her nakedness, I turned in disgust from her, as I had turned in disgust from her sister.
19 Yet she multiplied her whorings, remembering the days of her youth, when she prostituted herself in the land of Egypt
20 and lusted after her lovers there, whose members were like those of donkeys and whose emission was like that of stallions.
21 Thus you longed for the lewdness of your youth, when the Egyptians handled your bosom because of your youthful breasts.


22 Therefore, O Oholibah, thus says the Lord GOD: See here, I will stir up your lovers against you, from whom you turned in disgust, and I will bring them against you from every side:
23 the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them, desirable young men, governors and officials, all of them officers and men of renown, all of them riding on horses.
24 And they shall come against you from the north with chariots and wagons and a host of peoples. They shall set themselves against you on every side with buckler, shield, and helmet. And I will commit the judgment to them, and they shall judge you according to their judgments.
25 And I will set my jealousy against you, and they shall deal with you in fury. They shall cut off your nose and your ears, and your survivors shall fall by the sword. They shall seize your sons and your daughters, and your survivors shall be consumed by fire.
26 They shall also strip you of your clothes and take your beautiful jewels.
27 Thus I will put an end to your lewdness and your whoring begun in the land of Egypt, so that you shall not lift up your eyes to them or remember Egypt anymore.


28 For thus says the Lord GOD: I will give you into the hand of those whom you hate, into the hand of those from whom you turned in disgust,
29 and they shall deal with you in hatred and take away all the fruit of your labor and leave you naked and bare. The nakedness of your whoring shall be uncovered. Your lewdness and your harlotry
30 have brought this upon you, because you prostituted yourself with the nations and defiled yourself with their idols.
31 You have walked in the way of your sister; therefore I will give her cup into your hand.


32 Thus says the Lord GOD:


‘You shall drink your sister’s cup,
that is deep and large;
you shall be laughed at and held in derision,
for it holds much.
33 You shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow,
a cup of horror and desolation,
the cup of your sister Samaria.
34 You shall drink it and drain it out,
and gnaw its shards
and tear your breasts;
for I have spoken,
declares the Lord GOD.’


35 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: ‘Because you have forgotten me and cast me behind your back, you yourself shall bear the penalty for your lewdness and your harlotry.’”


36 And the LORD said to me: “Son of man, will you judge Oholah and Oholibah? Then declare to them their abominations.
37 For they have committed adultery, and blood is on their hands. With their idols they have committed adultery, and even their children whom they bore to me they have sacrificed to them as food.
38 Moreover, this they have done to me: they have defiled my sanctuary on the same day and profaned my Sabbaths.
39 For when they had slaughtered their children for their idols, they came into my sanctuary on the same day to profane it. This is how they behaved in my house!


40 Furthermore, they sent for men to come from afar, to whom a messenger was sent, and behold, they came. For them you bathed yourself, painted your eyes, and adorned yourself with ornaments.
41 You sat on a stately couch with a table spread before it, on which you had set my incense and my oil.
42 The sound of a carefree multitude was with her; and with men of the common sort were brought drunkards from the wilderness, and they put bracelets on the arms of the women and beautiful crowns on their heads.


43 Then I said of her who was worn out by adultery, ‘Now they will continue with her acts of harlotry, even her!’
44 For they went in to her, as men go in to a prostitute. Thus they went in to Oholah and to Oholibah, lewd women.
45 But righteous men shall judge them with the judgment of adulteresses, and with the judgment of women who shed blood, because they are adulteresses, and blood is on their hands.


46 For thus says the Lord GOD: ‘Bring up a host against them and give them over to terror and plunder.
47 And the host shall stone them with stones and cut them down with their swords. They shall kill their sons and their daughters and burn their houses with fire.
48 Thus I will put an end to lewdness in the land, that all women may take warning and not commit lewdness as you have done.
49 And they shall return your lewdness upon you, and you shall bear the penalty for your idolatry. Then you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.’”




Chapter 24


1 And the word of the LORD came to me in the ninth year, in the tenth month, on the tenth day of the month, saying,
2 “Son of man, write down the name of this day, this very day. The king of Babylon has laid siege to Jerusalem this very day.
3 And speak a parable to the rebellious house and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD:


‘Set on the pot, set it on;
also pour water into it.
4 Put in it pieces of meat,
every good piece, thigh and shoulder;
fill it with the choicest bones.
5 Take the choicest of the flock,
pile the bones under it;
make it boil well;
also let its bones seethe in it.’


6 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
‘Woe to the bloody city,
to the pot whose corrosion is in it,
and whose corrosion has not gone out of it!
Empty it piece by piece,
no lot has fallen upon it.
7 For her blood is in her midst;
she set it on the bare rock;
she did not pour it out on the ground,
to cover it with dust.
8 That it might cause wrath to come up to take vengeance,
I have set her blood on the bare rock,
so that it would not be covered.’


9 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
‘Woe to the bloody city!
I also will make the pile great.
10 Heap on the logs, kindle the fire,
boil the meat well, mix in the spices,
and let the bones be burned.
11 Then set it empty upon its coals,
that it may become hot and its bronze may glow,
and that its filthiness may be melted in it,
its corrosion consumed.
12 She has wearied herself with toil,
yet her abundant corrosion has not gone out of her;
her corrosion is in the fire.
13 In your lewd impurity, because I tried to cleanse you
but you would not be cleansed from your filthiness,
you shall not be cleansed again
until I have satisfied my fury upon you.


14 I, the LORD, have spoken.
It shall come to pass; I will do it.
I will not go back; I will not spare; I will not relent.
According to your ways and according to your deeds
they will judge you,’ declares the Lord GOD.”


15 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
16 “Son of man, I am about to take from you the delight of your eyes with a blow. Yet you shall not mourn or weep, nor shall your tears run down.
17 Groan silently; do not make mourning for the dead. Bind on your turban and put your sandals on your feet; do not cover your mustache, and do not eat the bread of mourners.”


18 So I spoke to the people in the morning, and at evening my wife died. And the next morning I did as I was commanded.


19 And the people said to me, “Will you not tell us what these things mean for us, that you are doing?”
20 Then I said to them, “The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
21 ‘Say to the house of Israel, “Thus says the Lord GOD: ‘Look here! I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your strength, the delight of your eyes and the desire of your soul. And your sons and your daughters whom you have left behind shall fall by the sword.
22 And you shall do as I have done; you shall not cover your mustache or eat the bread of mourners.
23 Your turbans shall be on your heads and your sandals on your feet. You shall not mourn or weep, but you shall rot away in your iniquities and groan to one another.
24 Thus Ezekiel shall be a sign to you; according to all that he has done you shall do. When this happens, then you shall know that I am the Lord GOD.’”’


25 As for you, son of man, surely on the day when I take from them their stronghold—the joy of their glory, the delight of their eyes and the longing of their soul—and also their sons and their daughters,
26 on that day a fugitive will come to you to report it to your ears.
27 On that day your mouth will be opened to the fugitive, and you shall speak and no longer be mute. So you shall be a sign to them, and they shall know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 25


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face toward the sons of Ammon and prophesy against them.
3 Say to the sons of Ammon, Hear the word of the Lord GOD: Thus says the Lord GOD: Because you said, ‘Aha!’ against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into exile,
4 therefore, behold, I am giving you to the sons of the east for a possession. They shall set their encampments among you and make their dwellings among you; they shall eat your fruit, and they shall drink your milk.
5 I will make Rabbah a pasture for camels and the sons of Ammon a resting place for flocks. Then you shall know that I am the LORD.


6 For thus says the Lord GOD: Because you clapped your hands and stamped your feet and rejoiced with all the malice of your soul against the land of Israel,
7 therefore, behold, I have stretched out my hand against you, and I will give you as plunder to the nations. I will cut you off from the peoples and make you perish from the lands. I will destroy you, and you shall know that I am the LORD.”


8 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because Moab and Seir say, ‘Behold, the house of Judah is like all the nations,’
9 therefore, behold, I will open the flank of Moab from the cities, from its cities on its frontier, the glory of the land—Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim.
10 I will give it along with the sons of Ammon to the sons of the east as a possession, so that the sons of Ammon may not be remembered among the nations,
11 and I will execute judgments upon Moab. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.


12 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because Edom has acted in vengeance against the house of Judah and has grievously offended in taking vengeance on them,
13 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I will stretch out my hand against Edom and cut off from it man and beast, and I will make it desolate from Teman; even to Dedan they shall fall by the sword.
14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall act in Edom according to my anger and according to my wrath, and they shall know my vengeance, declares the Lord GOD.


15 Thus says the Lord GOD: Because the Philistines have acted in vengeance and have taken vengeance with malice of soul to destroy with everlasting enmity,
16 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I will stretch out my hand against the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites and destroy the remnant of the seacoast.
17 I will execute great vengeance upon them with wrathful rebukes. Then they shall know that I am the LORD, when I lay my vengeance upon them.”




Chapter 26


1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, on the first of the month, that the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, because Tyre has said concerning Jerusalem, ‘Aha! She is broken, the gateway of the peoples; it has swung open to me; I shall be filled, now that she is laid waste,’
3 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: I am against you, O Tyre, and will bring up many nations against you, as the sea brings up its waves.
4 They shall destroy the walls of Tyre and break down her towers, and I will scrape her soil from her and make her a bare rock.
5 She shall be in the midst of the sea a place for spreading nets, for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD, and she shall become plunder for the nations.
6 And her daughters on the mainland shall be killed by the sword. Then they shall know that I am the LORD.


7 For thus says the Lord GOD: See how I will bring against Tyre from the north Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, with horses and chariots, with horsemen and an army, even a great company.
8 He shall kill with the sword your daughters on the mainland. He shall set up a siege wall against you and cast up a mound against you, and raise a roof of shields against you.
9 He shall direct the blow of his battering rams against your walls, and with his axes he shall break down your towers.
10 From the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover you; at the sound of the horseman and the wheel and the chariot, your walls shall shake when he enters your gates, as men enter a breached city.
11 With the hooves of his horses he shall trample all your streets; he shall kill your people with the sword, and your strong pillars shall fall to the ground.
12 They shall plunder your wealth and loot your merchandise; they shall break down your walls and destroy your pleasant houses; and your stones and your timber and your soil they shall cast into the midst of the waters.
13 And I will put an end to the sound of your songs, and the sound of your lyres shall be heard no more.
14 I will make you a bare rock; you shall be a place for spreading nets. You shall never be rebuilt, for I the LORD have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.


15 Thus says the Lord GOD to Tyre: Will not the coastlands shake at the sound of your fall, when the wounded groan, when slaughter is made in your midst?
16 Then all the princes of the sea shall come down from their thrones, remove their robes, and strip off their embroidered garments. They shall clothe themselves with trembling; they shall sit on the ground and tremble every moment and be appalled at you.
17 And they shall raise a lament over you and say to you,


How you have perished, you who were inhabited from the seas,
O city renowned, who was strong on the sea,
she and her inhabitants, who put their terror on all her inhabitants!
18 Now the coastlands tremble on the day of your fall,
and the coastlands that are by the sea are dismayed at your departure.


19 For thus says the Lord GOD: When I make you a desolate city, like cities that are not inhabited, when I bring up the deep over you, and the great waters cover you,
20 then I will make you go down with those who descend into the pit, to the people of old, and I will make you dwell in the lowest parts of the earth, like the waste places of old, with those who go down to the pit, so that you will not be inhabited; but I will set beauty in the land of the living.
21 I will bring you to a terrible end, and you shall be no more. Though you be sought for, you will never be found again, declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 27


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Now you, son of man, lift up a lamentation over Tyre,
3 and say to Tyre, who dwells at the entrances of the sea, who is the merchant of the peoples to many coastlands, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD:
O Tyre, you have said, “I am perfect in beauty.”
4 Your borders are in the heart of the seas;
your builders perfected your beauty.
5 They made all your planks of juniper from Senir;
they took a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast for you.
6 Of oaks from Bashan they made your oars;
they made your deck of ivory inlaid in boxwood from the coasts of Cyprus.
7 Fine embroidered linen from Egypt was your sail,
serving as your banner;
blue and purple from the coasts of Elishah
was your awning.
8 The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were your rowers;
your wise men, O Tyre, were aboard;
they were your pilots.
9 The elders of Gebal and her craftsmen were aboard to caulk your seams;
all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in you
to trade in your merchandise.
10 Persia, Lud, and Put were in your army,
your men of war;
they hung the shield and helmet in you;
they gave you splendor.
11 The men of Arvad and Helek were on your walls all around,
and valiant men were stationed in your towers;
they hung their shields on your walls all around;
they perfected your beauty.
12 Tarshish traded with you
because of your great wealth of every kind;
silver, iron, tin, and lead
they exchanged for your merchandise.
13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech traded with you;
they exchanged slaves and bronze vessels for your merchandise.
14 From Beth-togarmah they exchanged horses, war horses, and mules for your merchandise.
15 The men of Dedan traded with you;
many coastlands were your own special market;
they brought you ivory tusks and ebony as your payment.
16 Syria traded with you because of your great abundance of goods;
emeralds, purple, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, and rubies they gave you for your merchandise.
17 Judah and the land of Israel traded with you;
they exchanged wheat of Minnith, cakes, honey, oil, and balm for your merchandise.
18 Damascus traded with you because of your great abundance of goods,
because of your great wealth of every kind;
wine of Helbon and white wool they exchanged for your merchandise.
19 Dan and Javan from Uzal traded for your goods;
wrought iron, cassia, and calamus were among your merchandise.
20 Dedan traded with you in saddlecloths for riding.
21 Arabia and all the princes of Kedar were merchants of your hand;
they traded with you in lambs, rams, and goats.
22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah traded with you;
the best of all spices, precious stones, and gold they exchanged for your merchandise.
23 Haran, Canneh, Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and Chilmad traded with you.
24 They traded with you in choice garments, in cloaks of blue and embroidered work,
and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among your merchandise.
25 The ships of Tarshish carried your merchandise,
and you were filled and heavily laden
in the heart of the seas.
26 Your rowers have brought you into great waters;
the east wind has broken you
in the heart of the seas.


27 Your wealth, your wares, your merchandise, your mariners, your pilots,
your caulkers, your dealers in merchandise,
and all your men of war who are in you,
with all your company that is in your midst,
sink into the heart of the seas
on the day of your downfall.
28 At the sound of the cry of your pilots
the countryside shakes,
29 and all who handle the oar
abandon their ships.
The mariners and all the pilots of the sea
stand on the shore
30 and raise their voices for you
and cry out bitterly.
They cast dust on their heads
and wallow in ashes;
31 they make themselves bald for you
and gird themselves with sackcloth,
and they weep for you in bitterness of soul,
with bitter mourning.


32 In their wailing they raise a lamentation for you
and lament over you:
‘Who is like Tyre,
like one destroyed in the midst of the sea?
33 When your wares came from the seas,
you satisfied many peoples;
with your abundant wealth and merchandise
you enriched the kings of the earth.


34 Now you are wrecked by the seas,
in the depths of the waters;
your merchandise and all your company
have sunk with you.
35 All the inhabitants of the coastlands
are appalled at you,
and their kings are horribly afraid;
their faces are convulsed.
36 The merchants among the peoples hiss at you;
you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever.’”




Chapter 28


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, say to the prince of Tyre, Thus says the Lord GOD:
Because your heart is proud, and you have said, ‘I am a god;
I sit in the seat of gods, in the heart of the seas,’
yet you are a man, and not a god,
though you make your heart like the heart of a god—
3 behold, you are wiser than Daniel;
no secret is hidden from you;
4 by your wisdom and your understanding
you have made wealth for yourself,
and have gathered gold and silver
into your treasuries;
5 by the greatness of your wisdom in your trade
you have increased your wealth,
and your heart has become proud in your wealth—
6 therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Because you make your heart like the heart of a god.


7 Therefore, look how I will bring foreigners upon you,
the most ruthless of the nations;
and they shall draw their swords
against the beauty of your wisdom
and defile your splendor.
8 They shall bring you down to the pit,
and you shall die the death of the slain
in the heart of the seas.


9 Will you still say, ‘I am a god,’
in the presence of those who kill you,
though you are but a man, and no god,
in the hand of those who pierce you?
10 You shall die the death of the uncircumcised
by the hand of foreigners;
for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.”


11 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
12 “Son of man, raise a lamentation over the king of Tyre, and say to him, Thus says the Lord GOD:
You were the signet of perfection,
full of wisdom and perfect in beauty.
13 You were in Eden, the garden of God;
every precious stone was your covering,
sardius, topaz, and diamond,
beryl, onyx, and jasper,
sapphire, emerald, and carbuncle;
and crafted in gold were your settings and your engravings.
On the day that you were created
they were prepared.
14 You were an anointed guardian cherub;
I placed you;
you were on the holy mountain of God;
in the midst of the stones of fire you walked.
15 You were blameless in your ways
from the day you were created,
till unrighteousness was found in you.
16 In the abundance of your trade
you were filled with violence in your midst,
and you sinned;
so I cast you as a profane thing
from the mountain of God,
and I destroyed you,
O guardian cherub,
from the midst of the stones of fire.


17 Your heart was proud because of your beauty;
you corrupted your wisdom for the sake of your splendor.
I cast you to the ground;
I exposed you before kings,
to feast their eyes on you.
18 By the multitude of your iniquities,
in the unrighteousness of your trade,
you profaned your sanctuaries;
so I brought fire out from your midst;
it consumed you,
and I turned you to ashes on the earth
in the sight of all who saw you.
19 All who know you among the peoples
are appalled at you;
you have come to a dreadful end
and shall be no more forever.”


20 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
21 “Son of man, set your face toward Sidon,
and prophesy against her,
22 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
Look how I am against you, O Sidon,
and I will manifest my glory in your midst.
And they shall know that I am the LORD
when I execute judgments in her
and manifest my holiness in her;
23 for I will send pestilence into her,
and blood into her streets;
and the slain shall fall in her midst,
by the sword that is against her on every side;
and they shall know that I am the LORD.
24 And for the house of Israel there shall be no more a brier to prick or a thorn to hurt them
from all their neighbors who have treated them with contempt.
Then they will know that I am the Lord GOD.


25 Thus says the Lord GOD: When I gather the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are scattered,
and manifest my holiness in them in the sight of the nations,
then they shall dwell in their own land that I gave to my servant Jacob.
26 And they shall dwell securely in it, and build houses, and plant vineyards.
They shall dwell securely, when I execute judgments upon all their neighbors who have treated them with contempt.
Then they will know that I am the LORD their God.”




Chapter 29


1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, on the twelfth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him and against all Egypt.
3 Speak, and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
See, I am against you, Pharaoh king of Egypt,
the great dragon lying in the midst of his Nile streams,
who says, ‘My Nile is mine, and I made it.’


4 I will put hooks in your jaws,
and I will make the fish of your Nile streams stick to your scales,
and I will draw you up out of the midst of your Nile streams,
with all the fish of your Nile streams
that stick to your scales.
5 And I will cast you out into the wilderness,
you and all the fish of your Nile streams;
on the open field you shall fall;
you shall not be gathered or buried.
I have given you as food to the beasts of the earth
and to the birds of the heavens.


6 Then all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the LORD.
Because you have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel,
7 when they grasped you with the hand, you broke,
and tore all their shoulders;
and when they leaned on you, you broke,
and made all their loins to shake.


8 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I will bring a sword upon you,
and will cut off from you man and beast,
9 and the land of Egypt shall be a desolation and a waste.
Then they will know that I am the LORD.
Because you said, ‘The Nile is mine, and I made it,’
10 therefore, behold, I am against you and against your Nile streams,
and I will make the land of Egypt an utter waste and desolation,
from Migdol to Syene,
as far as the border of Cush.


11 No foot of man shall pass through it,
and no foot of beast shall pass through it;
it shall be uninhabited forty years.
12 And I will make the land of Egypt a desolation in the midst of desolated lands,
and her cities shall be a desolation forty years
among cities that are laid waste.
I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations,
and disperse them through the countries.


13 For thus says the Lord GOD: At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the peoples among whom they were scattered,
14 and I will restore the fortunes of Egypt and bring them back to the land of Pathros, the land of their origin,
and there they shall be a lowly kingdom.
15 It shall be the lowliest of the kingdoms,
and never again exalt itself above the nations;
and I will make them so small that they will never again rule over the nations.
16 And it shall never again be the confidence of the house of Israel,
recalling their iniquity, when they turn to follow them.
Then they will know that I am the Lord GOD.”


17 And it came to pass in the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made his army labor hard against Tyre;
every head was made bald, and every shoulder rubbed bare;
yet neither he nor his army received wages from Tyre
for the labor that he had performed against her.


19 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Look! I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon,
and he shall carry off her wealth
and seize her spoil and take her plunder;
and it shall be the wages for his army.


20 I have given him the land of Egypt as his payment for which he labored,
because they worked for Me,
declares the Lord GOD.
21 On that day I will cause a horn to sprout for the house of Israel,
and I will open your mouth among them.
Then they will know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 30


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, prophesy and say, Thus says the Lord GOD:
Wail, ‘Alas for the day!’
3 For the day is near,
the day of the LORD is near;
it will be a day of clouds,
a time of doom for the nations.
4 A sword shall come upon Egypt,
and anguish shall be in Cush,
when the slain fall in Egypt,
and her wealth is carried away,
and her foundations are torn down.
5 Cush, and Put, and Lud, and all Arabia, and Libya, and the sons of the land of the covenant shall fall with them by the sword."


6 Thus says the LORD:
"Those who support Egypt shall fall,
and the pride of her strength shall come down;
from Migdol to Syene they shall fall in it by the sword,"
declares the Lord GOD.
7 "And they shall be desolate in the midst of desolated lands,
and her cities shall be in the midst of cities that are laid waste.
8 Then they will know that I am the LORD,
when I have set fire to Egypt,
and all her helpers are broken.
9 On that day messengers shall go forth from Me in ships to terrify confident Cush,
and anguish shall be on them in the day of Egypt;
for behold, it comes."


10 Thus says the Lord GOD:
"I will put an end to the hordes of Egypt
by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.
11 He and his people with him, the most ruthless of the nations,
shall be brought in to destroy the land;
and they shall draw their swords against Egypt
and fill the land with the slain.
12 And I will make the Nile streams dry,
and will sell the land into the hand of evil men;
and I will make the land and all that fills it desolate
by the hand of foreigners.
I, the LORD, have spoken."


13 Thus says the Lord GOD:
"I will destroy the idols
and put an end to the images in Memphis;
there shall no longer be a prince from the land of Egypt;
so I will put fear in the land of Egypt.
14 I will make Pathros desolate,
and will set fire to Zoan,
and will execute judgments on Thebes.
15 I will pour out My wrath on Pelusium,
the stronghold of Egypt,
and will cut off the multitude of Thebes.
16 And I will set fire to Egypt;
Pelusium shall writhe in anguish,
Thebes shall be breached,
and Memphis shall face enemies daily.
17 The young men of On and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword,
and the women shall go into captivity.
18 At Tehaphnehes the day shall be dark,
when I break there the yoke bars of Egypt,
and the pride of her strength comes to an end;
she shall be covered by a cloud,
and her daughters shall go into captivity.
19 So I will execute judgments on Egypt,
and they will know that I am the LORD."


20 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, on the seventh day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
21 “Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt;
and behold, it has not been bound up to heal,
to be wrapped with a bandage,
that it may become strong to hold the sword."


22 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
"Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt,
and I will break his arms,
both the strong arm and the one that was broken,
and I will cause the sword to fall from his hand.
23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations
and disperse them through the countries.
24 And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,
and put My sword in his hand,
but I will break the arms of Pharaoh,
and he will groan before him
with the groanings of a mortally wounded man.
25 Thus I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon,
but the arms of Pharaoh shall fall.
Then they will know that I am the LORD,
when I put My sword into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he stretches it out against the land of Egypt.
26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations
and disperse them through the countries.
Then they will know that I am the LORD.”




Chapter 31


1 In the eleventh year, in the third month, on the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt and to his multitude:
‘Whom are you like in your greatness?


3 Behold, Assyria was a cedar in Lebanon,
with beautiful branches and forest shade,
and of towering height;
its top was among the clouds.
4 The waters nourished it;
the deep made it grow tall,
making its rivers flow
around the place of its planting,
sending its channels
to all the trees of the field.
5 Therefore it towered higher
than all the trees of the field;
its boughs grew large and its branches long
from abundant water in its shoots.
6 All the birds of the sky nested in its boughs;
under its branches all the beasts of the field gave birth,
and in its shade lived all great nations.


7 It was beautiful in its greatness,
in the length of its branches;
for its roots went down
to abundant waters.
8 The cedars in the garden of God could not rival it,
nor could the fir trees compare with its boughs;
the plane trees were not like its branches;
no tree in the garden of God
was its equal in beauty.
9 I made it beautiful
with the multitude of its branches,
and all the trees of Eden, in the garden of God, envied it.


10 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD:
Because it towered high
and set its top among the clouds,
and its heart was lifted up in its height,
11 I gave it into the hand of the ruler of the nations;
he will surely deal with it;
I drove it out for its wickedness.
12 Foreigners, the most ruthless of nations,
cut it down and left it.
Its branches fell on the mountains
and in all the valleys;
its boughs lay broken
in all the ravines of the land;
and all the peoples of the earth
went away from its shade and left it.


13 On its fallen trunk
all the birds of the sky dwell,
and on its branches
all the beasts of the field are.
14 This happened so that
no trees by the waters
may grow tall to their top among the clouds,
and so that no trees that drink water
may stand in height among the clouds;
for they are all given over to death,
to the depths of the earth,
among the children of man,
to those who go down to the pit.


15 Thus says the Lord GOD:
On the day it went down to the grave
I caused mourning;
I covered the deep for it,
and I restrained its rivers,
and the great waters were held back;
I clothed Lebanon in black for it,
and all the trees of the field fainted because of it.
16 I made the nations quake
at the sound of its fall,
when I cast it down to the grave
with those who go down to the pit.
And all the trees of Eden,
the choice and best of Lebanon,
all that drink water,
were comforted in the depths of the earth.
17 They also went down to the grave with it,
to those slain by the sword,
yes, those who were its arm,
who lived under its shade among the nations.


18 Whom are you like in glory and greatness
among the trees of Eden?
Yet you shall be brought down
with the trees of Eden
to the depths of the earth;
you shall lie among the uncircumcised,
with those slain by the sword.
This is Pharaoh and all his multitude,’
declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 32


1 In the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, on the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, take up a lament over Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say to him:
‘You likened yourself to a young lion of the nations,
but you are like a dragon in the seas;
you burst forth in your rivers,
troubled the waters with your feet,
and fouled their rivers.’


3 Thus says the Lord GOD:
‘I will spread my net over you
with a company of many peoples,
and they will haul you up in my dragnet.
4 I will leave you on the land;
I will cast you on the open field;
I will cause all the birds of the sky to settle on you,
and I will satisfy the beasts of the whole earth with you.
5 I will lay your flesh on the mountains
and fill the valleys with your carcass.
6 I will drench the land
to the mountains with your flowing blood,
and the ravines will be filled with you.


7 When I extinguish you,
I will cover the heavens and darken their stars;
I will cover the sun with a cloud,
and the moon will not give its light.
8 All the bright lights of the sky
I will make dark over you,
and I will put darkness on your land,’
declares the Lord GOD.


9 ‘I will trouble the hearts of many peoples
when I bring your destruction among the nations,
to lands that you have not known.
10 I will cause many peoples to be appalled at you,
and their kings will shudder in horror because of you,
when I brandish my sword before them;
and they will tremble continually,
every man for his own life,
on the day of your downfall.’


11 For thus says the Lord GOD:
‘The sword of the king of Babylon will come upon you.
12 I will cause your multitude to fall
by the swords of the mighty ones,
all of them ruthless among the nations;
and they will devastate the pride of Egypt,
and all its multitude will be destroyed.
13 I will destroy all its beasts
from beside many waters;
the foot of man will not trouble them anymore,
nor will the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
14 Then I will make their waters settle,
and will cause their rivers to run like oil,’
declares the Lord GOD.


15 ‘When I make the land of Egypt desolate,
and the land is stripped of all that fills it,
when I strike all who live in it,
then they will know that I am the LORD.
16 This is a lament; it shall be chanted;
the daughters of the nations shall chant it;
over Egypt and all its multitude they shall chant it,’
declares the Lord GOD.”


17 In the twelfth year, on the fifteenth day of the month, the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
18 “Son of man, wail over the multitude of Egypt,
and bring it down,
her and the daughters of mighty nations,
to the depths of the earth,
with those who go down to the pit.


19 ‘Whom do you surpass in beauty?
Go down and be laid
with the uncircumcised.’
20 They shall fall
in the midst of those slain by the sword;
she is given over to the sword;
they have drawn her away and all her multitudes.
21 The mighty chiefs shall speak to him
out of the midst of the grave,
with his helpers:
‘They have gone down;
they lie still, the uncircumcised,
slain by the sword.’


22 Assyria is there,
and all her company;
their graves are all around her,
all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
23 whose graves are set
in the recesses of the pit,
and her company is all around her grave,
all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
who spread terror in the land of the living.


24 Elam is there,
and all her multitude around her grave,
all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
who went down uncircumcised
to the depths of the earth,
who spread their terror in the land of the living;
and they bear their disgrace
with those who go down to the pit.
25 They have made her a bed among the slain
with all her multitude;
her graves are all around it;
all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword;
for they spread their terror in the land of the living,
and they bear their disgrace
with those who go down to the pit;
in the midst of the slain they are placed.


26 Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude are there;
their graves are all around them,
all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword,
for they spread their terror in the land of the living.
27 They do not lie with the mighty
who have fallen from among the uncircumcised,
who went down to Sheol with their weapons of war,
whose swords were laid under their heads,
and whose iniquities are on their bones,
for the terror of the mighty was in the land of the living.
28 But you will be broken
in the midst of the uncircumcised,
and lie with those slain by the sword.


29 Edom is there,
her kings and all her princes,
who for all their might are laid with those slain by the sword;
they will lie with the uncircumcised,
and with those who go down to the pit.


30 All the princes of the north are there,
and all the Sidonians,
who have gone down in shame with the slain,
for the terror that they caused by their might;
they lie uncircumcised
with those slain by the sword,
and bear their disgrace
with those who go down to the pit.
31 Pharaoh will see them
and be comforted over all his multitude,
Pharaoh and all his army,
slain by the sword,
declares the Lord GOD.
32 For I spread my terror
in the land of the living;
and he will be laid
in the midst of the uncircumcised,
with those slain by the sword,
Pharaoh and all his multitude,
declares the Lord GOD.”




Chapter 33


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 "Son of man, speak to the sons of your people and say to them, 'When I bring the sword upon a land, and the people of the land take a man from among them and set him as their watchman,
3 and he sees the sword coming upon the land and blows the trumpet and warns the people,
4 then if anyone who hears the sound of the trumpet does not take warning, and the sword comes and takes him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.
5 He heard the sound of the trumpet and did not take warning; his blood shall be upon himself. But if he had taken warning, he would have delivered his life.
6 But if the watchman sees the sword coming and does not blow the trumpet, so that the people are not warned, and the sword comes and takes any one of them, that man is taken away in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at the watchman’s hand.'"


7 "So you, son of man, I have set you as a watchman for the house of Israel. When you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them warning from me.
8 If I say to the wicked, 'O wicked man, you shall surely die,' and you do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at your hand.
9 But if you warn the wicked to turn from his way, and he does not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity, but you will have delivered your life."


10 "And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel: 'Thus you have spoken, saying, Surely our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we rot away in them. How then can we live?'
11 Say to them, 'As I live, declares the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn back, turn back from your evil ways, for why will you die, O house of Israel?'"


12 "And you, son of man, say to the sons of your people, 'The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him when he transgresses, and as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall by it when he turns from his wickedness. And the righteous shall not be able to live by his righteousness in the day that he sins.
13 Though I say to the righteous that he shall surely live, yet if he trusts in his righteousness and does injustice, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered, but in his injustice that he has done, he shall die.
14 And though I say to the wicked, 'You shall surely die,' yet if he turns from his sin and does what is just and right,
15 if the wicked restores the pledge, gives back what he has taken by robbery, walks in the statutes of life, committing no iniquity, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
16 None of the sins that he has committed shall be remembered against him; he has done what is just and right; he shall surely live."


17 "Yet the sons of your people say, 'The way of the Lord is not just,' when it is their way that is not just.
18 When the righteous turns from his righteousness and does injustice, he shall die for it.
19 And when the wicked turns from his wickedness and does what is just and right, he shall live by it.
20 Yet you say, 'The way of the Lord is not just.' O house of Israel, I will judge each of you according to his ways."


21 In the twelfth year of our exile, in the tenth month, on the fifth day of the month, a fugitive from Jerusalem came to me and said, "The city has been struck down."
22 Now the hand of the LORD had been upon me the evening before the fugitive came, and he had opened my mouth by the time the man came to me in the morning, so my mouth was opened, and I was no longer mute.


23 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
24 "Son of man, those who live in these waste places in the land of Israel keep saying, 'Abraham was one man, yet he got possession of the land; but we are many, surely the land is given us to possess.'
25 Therefore say to them, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: You eat flesh with the blood and lift up your eyes to your idols and shed blood—shall you then possess the land?
26 You rely on your sword, you commit abominations, and each of you defiles his neighbor’s wife—shall you then possess the land?'"


27 "Say this to them, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: As I live, surely those who are in the waste places shall fall by the sword, and whoever is in the open field I will give to the beasts to be devoured, and those who are in strongholds and in caves shall die by pestilence.
28 And I will make the land a desolation and a waste, and her proud might shall come to an end, and the mountains of Israel shall be so desolate that none will pass through.
29 Then they will know that I am the LORD, when I have made the land a desolation and a waste because of all their abominations that they have committed.'"


30 "As for you, son of man, your sons, those who talk together about you by the walls and at the doors of the houses, speak to one another, each to his brother, saying, 'Come, and hear what the word is that comes from the LORD.'
31 And they come to you as a people come, and they sit before you as my people, and they hear your words but they will not do them, for with lustful talk in their mouths they act; their heart is set on their gain.
32 And you see that you are to them like one who sings love songs with a beautiful voice and plays well on an instrument, for they hear your words, but they will not do them.
33 When this comes—and it will certainly come!—then they will know that a prophet has been among them."




Chapter 34


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 "Son of man, prophesy against the shepherds of Israel. Prophesy and say to them, even to the shepherds, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: Woe to the shepherds of Israel who feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the flock?
3 You eat the fat, you clothe yourselves with the wool, you slaughter the fattened ones, but you do not feed the flock.
4 The weak you have not strengthened, the sick you have not healed, the injured you have not bound up, the strayed you have not brought back, the lost you have not sought, and with force and harshness you have ruled them.
5 So they were scattered, because there was no shepherd, and they became food for all the wild beasts.'
6 My flock wandered through all the mountains and on every high hill. My flock was scattered over all the face of the earth, with none to search or seek for them."


7 "Therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD:
8 'As I live,' declares the Lord GOD, 'surely because my flock became a prey, and my flock became food for all the wild beasts, since there was no shepherd, and because my shepherds did not search for my flock, but the shepherds fed themselves and did not feed my flock,'
9 therefore, you shepherds, hear the word of the LORD:
10 'Thus says the Lord GOD, look how I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hand and put a stop to their feeding the flock. No longer shall the shepherds feed themselves. I will rescue my flock from their mouths, that they may not be food for them.'"


11 "For thus says the Lord GOD: 'I myself will search for my sheep and will seek them out.
12 As a shepherd seeks out his flock when he is among his sheep that have been scattered, so will I seek out my sheep, and I will rescue them from all places where they have been scattered on a day of clouds and thick darkness.
13 And I will bring them out from the peoples and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their own land. And I will feed them on the mountains of Israel, by the ravines, and in all the inhabited places of the land.
14 I will feed them with good pasture, and on the mountain heights of Israel shall be their grazing land. There they shall lie down in good grazing land, and on rich pasture they shall feed on the mountains of Israel.
15 I myself will be the shepherd of my sheep, and I myself will make them lie down,' declares the Lord GOD.
16 'I will seek the lost, and I will bring back the strayed, and I will bind up the injured, and I will strengthen the weak, and the fat and the strong I will destroy. I will feed them in justice.'"


17 "As for you, my flock, thus says the Lord GOD: 'I judge between sheep and sheep, between rams and male goats.
18 Is it not enough for you to feed on the good pasture, that you must tread down with your feet the rest of your pasture, and to drink of clear water, that you must muddy the rest with your feet?
19 And must my sheep eat what you have trodden with your feet, and drink what you have muddied with your feet?'"


20 "Therefore, thus says the Lord GOD to them: 'I myself will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
21 Because you push with side and shoulder, and thrust at all the weak with your horns, until you have scattered them abroad,
22 I will save my flock; they shall no longer be a prey. And I will judge between sheep and sheep.
23 And I will set up over them one shepherd, my servant David, and he shall feed them: he shall feed them and be their shepherd.
24 And I, the LORD, will be their God, and my servant David shall be prince among them. I, the LORD, have spoken.'"


25 "I will make with them a covenant of peace and banish wild beasts from the land, so that they may dwell securely in the wilderness and sleep in the forests.
26 And I will make them and the places all around my hill a blessing, and I will send down the showers in their season; they shall be showers of blessing.
27 And the trees of the field shall yield their fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase, and they shall be secure in their land. And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I break the bars of their yoke, and deliver them from the hand of those who enslaved them.
28 They shall no more be a prey to the nations, nor shall the beasts of the land devour them. They shall dwell securely, and none shall make them afraid.
29 And I will provide for them splendid vegetation so that they shall no more be consumed with hunger in the land, and no longer suffer the reproach of the nations.
30 And they shall know that I, the LORD their God, am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people,' declares the Lord GOD.
31 'And you are my sheep, human sheep of my pasture, and I am your God,' declares the Lord GOD."


Chapter 35


1 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 Son of man, set your face against Mount Seir, and prophesy against it,
3 and say to it, Thus says the Lord GOD: I am against you, Mount Seir, and I will stretch out my hand against you, and I will make you a desolation and a waste.
4 I will lay your cities waste, and you shall become a desolation, and you shall know that I am the LORD.


5 Because you cherished perpetual enmity and gave over the sons of Israel to the power of the sword at the time of their calamity, at the time of the final punishment,
6 therefore, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will prepare you for blood, and blood shall pursue you. Because you did not hate bloodshed, therefore blood shall pursue you.
7 I will make Mount Seir a waste and a desolation, and I will cut off from it all who come and go.
8 And I will fill its mountains with the slain. On your hills and in your valleys and in all your ravines those slain with the sword shall fall.
9 I will make you a perpetual desolation, and your cities shall not be inhabited. Then you will know that I am the LORD.


10 Because you said, These two nations and these two lands shall be mine, and we will take possession of them, although the LORD was there,
11 therefore, as I live, declares the Lord GOD, I will deal with you according to the anger and envy that you showed because of your hatred against them. And I will make myself known among them, when I judge you.
12 And you shall know that I am the LORD. I have heard all the revilings that you uttered against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to devour.
13 And you magnified yourselves against me with your mouth and multiplied your words against me; I heard it.


14 Thus says the Lord GOD: While the whole earth rejoices, I will make you desolate.
15 As you rejoiced over the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so I will deal with you; you shall be desolate, Mount Seir, and all Edom, yes, all of it. Then they will know that I am the LORD.




Chapter 36


1 And you, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, and say, "O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD.
2 Thus says the Lord GOD: 'Because the enemy said of you, "Aha!" and, "The ancient heights have become our possession,"'
3 therefore prophesy, and say, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "Because, indeed, they made you desolate and swallowed you up on every side, so that you became a possession to the rest of the nations, and you were taken up on the lips of talkers and the gossip of the people,"
4 therefore, O mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD: "Thus says the Lord GOD to the mountains and the hills, the ravines and the valleys, the desolate wastes and the deserted cities, which have become a prey and derision to the rest of the nations all around,"
5 therefore thus says the Lord GOD: "Surely I have spoken in my hot jealousy against the rest of the nations and against all Edom, who gave my land to themselves as a possession with wholehearted joy and utter contempt, that they might plunder its pastureland."'
6 Therefore prophesy concerning the land of Israel, and say to the mountains and the hills, to the ravines and the valleys, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "I have spoken in my jealousy and in my wrath, because you have borne the reproach of the nations."
7 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: "I swear that the nations that are all around you shall themselves bear their reproach."'"


8 "But you, O mountains of Israel, you shall shoot forth your branches and yield your fruit for my people Israel, for they are soon to come.
9 For behold, I am for you, and I will turn to you, and you shall be tilled and sown.
10 And I will multiply men on you, the whole house of Israel, all of it. The cities shall be inhabited and the waste places rebuilt.
11 And I will multiply on you man and beast, and they shall multiply and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited as in your former times, and will do more good to you than ever before. Then you will know that I am the LORD.
12 Yes, I will cause men to walk upon you, my people Israel, and they shall possess you, and you shall be their inheritance, and you shall no longer bereave them of children."'


13 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "Because they say to you, You devour men and you bereave your nation of children,
14 therefore you shall no longer devour men and no longer bereave your nation of children, declares the Lord GOD.
15 And I will no longer let you hear the reproach of the nations, and you shall no longer bear the disgrace of the peoples, and you shall no longer cause your nation to stumble, declares the Lord GOD."'"


16 And the word of the LORD came to me, saying,
17 "Son of man, when the house of Israel lived in their own land, they defiled it by their ways and their deeds. Their ways before me were like the uncleanness of a woman in her impurity.
18 So I poured out my wrath upon them for the blood that they had shed in the land, and for the idols with which they had defiled it.
19 I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the countries. In accordance with their ways and their deeds I judged them.
20 But when they came to the nations, wherever they came, they profaned my holy name, in that it was said of them, These are the people of the LORD, and yet they had to go out of his land.
21 But I had concern for my holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations to which they came."


22 "Therefore say to the house of Israel, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "It is not for your sake, O house of Israel, that I am about to act, but for the sake of my holy name, which you have profaned among the nations to which you came.
23 And I will sanctify my great name, which has been profaned among the nations, and which you have profaned among them. And the nations shall know that I am the LORD," declares the Lord GOD, "when through you I display my holiness before their eyes.
24 For I will take you from the nations and gather you from all the countries and bring you into your own land.
25 I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleanness, and from all your idols I will cleanse you.
26 And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh.
27 And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules.
28 You shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and you shall be my people, and I will be your God.
29 And I will deliver you from all your uncleanness. And I will summon the grain and make it abundant and lay no famine upon you.
30 I will make the fruit of the tree and the increase of the field abundant, that you may never again suffer the disgrace of famine among the nations.
31 Then you will remember your evil ways, and your deeds that were not good, and you will loathe yourselves for your iniquities and your abominations.
32 It is not for your sake that I will act, declares the Lord GOD; let that be known to you. Be ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel."


33 Thus says the Lord GOD: "On the day that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be inhabited, and the waste places shall be rebuilt.
34 And the land that was desolate shall be tilled, instead of being the desolation that it was in the sight of all who passed by."
35 And they will say, "This land that was desolate has become like the garden of Eden, and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are now fortified and inhabited.
36 Then the nations that are left all around you shall know that I am the LORD; I have rebuilt the ruined places and replanted that which was desolate. I, the LORD, have spoken, and I will do it."'"


37 Thus says the Lord GOD: "This also I will let the house of Israel ask me to do for them: to increase their men like a flock.
38 Like the flock for sacrifices, like the flock at Jerusalem during her appointed feasts, so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men. Then they will know that I am the LORD."




Chapter 37


1 The hand of the LORD was upon me, and he brought me out by the Spirit of the LORD and set me down in the middle of the valley, and it was full of bones.
2 He made me pass all around them, and I saw there were very many on the surface of the valley, and I saw that they were very dry.
3 And he said to me, “Son of man, can these bones live?” And I said, “O Lord GOD, you know.”
4 Then he said to me, “Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, 'O dry bones, hear the word of the LORD.
5 Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones: I will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall live.
6 And I will put sinews on you, and will cause flesh to come upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and you shall live, and you shall know that I am the LORD.'”


7 So I prophesied as I was commanded. And as I prophesied, there was a sound, and there was a rattling, and the bones came together, bone to its bone.
8 And I looked, and saw that there were sinews on them, and flesh came upon them, and skin covered them, but there was no breath in them.
9 Then he said to me, “Prophesy to the breath, prophesy, son of man, and say to the breath, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.”'"
10 So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood on their feet, an exceedingly great army.


11 Then he said to me, “Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. They say, ‘Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost; we are cut off.’
12 Therefore prophesy and say to them, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "Watch how I will open your graves and cause you to come up out of your graves, my people, and I will bring you into the land of Israel.
13 And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I open your graves and cause you to come up out of your graves, my people.
14 And I will put my Spirit within you, and you shall live, and I will place you in your own land. Then you shall know that I, the LORD, have spoken, and I have done it, declares the LORD.”'c


15 The word of the LORD came again to me, saying,
16 “And you, son of man, take one stick and write on it: ‘For Judah and the sons of Israel his companions.’ Then take another stick and write on it: ‘For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and all the house of Israel his companions.’
17 Then join them to one another into one stick, that they may become one in your hand.
18 And when the sons of your people speak to you, saying, ‘Will you not declare to us what you mean by these?’
19 say to them, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "I am about to take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions, and I will put them with it, with the stick of Judah, and make them into one stick, and they shall be one in my hand.
20 And the sticks on which you write shall be in your hand before their eyes."'


21 Then say to them, 'Thus says the Lord GOD: "I will take the sons of Israel from the nations among which they have gone, and will gather them from all around, and bring them into their own land.
22 And I will make them one nation in the land, on the mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king over them all. And they shall no longer be two nations, and no longer be divided into two kingdoms.
23 They shall not defile themselves any more with their idols, or with their detestable things, or with any of their transgressions. But I will save them from all their backslidings in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them. So they shall be my people, and I will be their God."


24 "My servant David shall be king over them, and they all shall have one shepherd. They shall walk in my rules and be careful to observe my statutes.
25 They shall dwell in the land that I gave to my servant Jacob, in which your fathers lived. They and their children and their children’s children shall dwell there forever, and David my servant shall be their prince forever.
26 I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be an everlasting covenant with them. And I will place them and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in their midst forevermore.
27 My dwelling place shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
28 Then the nations shall know that I am the LORD who sanctifies Israel, when my sanctuary is in their midst forevermore.”'"




Chapter 38


1 The word of the LORD came to me, saying,
2 “Son of man, set your face against Gog of the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,
3 and say, Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against you, Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
4 I will turn you about and put hooks into your jaws, and I will bring you out, and all your army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great company with buckler and shield, all of them wielding swords—
5 Persia, Cush, and Put are with them, all of them with shield and helmet;
6 Gomer and all his hordes; Beth-Togarmah from the far north and all his hordes—many peoples with you."


7 "Get ready, and prepare yourself, you and all your companies that are assembled about you, and be a guard for them.
8 After many days you will be mustered. In the latter years you will come into the land that is restored from the sword, whose inhabitants have been gathered from many peoples to the mountains of Israel, which had been a continual waste. Its people were brought out from the nations and now dwell securely, all of them.
9 You will advance, coming like a storm. You will be like a cloud covering the land, you and all your hordes, and many peoples with you."


10 Thus says the Lord GOD: "On that day thoughts will come into your mind, and you will devise an evil plan.
11 You will say, ‘I will go up against the land of unwalled villages. I will fall upon the quiet people who dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having no bars or gates’—
12 to seize spoil and carry off plunder, to turn your hand against the waste places that are now inhabited, and against a people gathered from the nations, who have acquired livestock and goods, who dwell at the center of the earth.
13 Sheba and Dedan and the merchants of Tarshish and all its young lions will say to you, ‘Have you come to seize spoil? Have you assembled your company to carry off plunder, to carry away silver and gold, to take away livestock and goods, to seize great spoil?’"


14 "Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say to Gog, Thus says the Lord GOD: On that day when my people Israel dwell securely, will you not know it?
15 You will come from your place out of the far north, you and many peoples with you, all of them riding on horses, a great assembly and a mighty army.
16 You will come up against my people Israel like a cloud covering the land. In the latter days I will bring you against my land, that the nations may know me, when through you, O Gog, I am sanctified before their eyes."


17 Thus says the Lord GOD: "Are you he of whom I spoke in former days by my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days for years that I would bring you against them?
18 But on that day, the day that Gog comes against the land of Israel, declares the Lord GOD, my wrath will be aroused.
19 In my zeal and in my blazing fury I declare: On that day there shall be a great earthquake in the land of Israel.
20 The fish of the sea and the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the field and all creeping things that creep on the ground, and all the men who are on the face of the earth, shall quake at my presence. The mountains shall be thrown down, the cliffs shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground."


21 "I will summon a sword against Gog on all my mountains, declares the Lord GOD. Every man’s sword will be against his brother.
22 With pestilence and with bloodshed I will enter into judgment with him, and I will rain upon him and his hordes and the many peoples who are with him torrential rains and hailstones, fire and brimstone.
23 So I will magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known in the eyes of many nations. Then they shall know that I am the LORD."




Chapter 39


1 And you, son of man, prophesy against Gog and say, "Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I am against you, O Gog, chief prince of Meshech and Tubal.
2 And I will turn you about and drive you on, and bring you up from the far north, and lead you against the mountains of Israel.
3 Then I will strike your bow from your left hand, and I will cause your arrows to fall from your right hand.
4 You shall fall on the mountains of Israel, you and all your hordes and the peoples who are with you. I will give you to birds of prey of every kind and to the beasts of the field to be devoured.
5 You shall fall in the open field, for I have spoken, declares the Lord GOD.
6 I will send fire on Magog and on those who dwell securely in the coastlands, and they shall know that I am the LORD."


7 "And my holy name I will make known in the midst of my people Israel, and I will not let my holy name be profaned anymore. And the nations shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.
8 Behold, it is coming, and it shall be done, declares the Lord GOD. This is the day of which I have spoken.
9 Then those who dwell in the cities of Israel shall go out and make fires of the weapons and burn them, shields and bucklers, bows and arrows, clubs and spears, and they shall make fires of them for seven years.
10 So that they will not take wood from the field or cut down any from the forests, for they will make fires of the weapons. They will seize the spoil of those who despoiled them and plunder those who plundered them, declares the Lord GOD."


11 "On that day I will give to Gog a place for burial in Israel, the Valley of the Travelers, east of the sea. It will block the travelers, for there Gog and all his multitude will be buried. It will be called the Valley of Hamon-gog.
12 For seven months the house of Israel will be burying them, in order to cleanse the land.
13 All the people of the land will bury them, and it will bring them renown on the day that I am glorified, declares the Lord GOD.
14 They will set apart men to continually pass through the land and bury those travelers remaining on the face of the land, so as to cleanse it. At the end of seven months they will make their search.
15 And when these pass through the land, and one sees a human bone, then he will set up a marker by it, till the buriers have buried it in the Valley of Hamon-gog.
16 (Hamonah is also the name of the city.) Thus they shall cleanse the land.


17 As for you, son of man, thus says the Lord GOD: Speak to the birds of every sort and to all beasts of the field: Assemble and come, gather from every side to the sacrifice that I am preparing for you, a great sacrifice on the mountains of Israel, that you may eat flesh and drink blood.
18 You shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the princes of the earth—of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bulls, all of them fat beasts of Bashan.
19 And you shall eat fat till you are full, and drink blood till you are drunk, at the sacrifice that I am preparing for you.
20 And you shall be filled at my table with horses and charioteers, with mighty men and all kinds of warriors, declares the Lord GOD.


21 And I will set my glory among the nations, and all the nations shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid on them.
22 The house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God, from that day forward.
23 And the nations shall know that the house of Israel went into exile for their iniquity, because they dealt treacherously with me. So I hid my face from them and gave them into the hand of their adversaries, and they all fell by the sword.
24 I dealt with them according to their uncleanness and their transgressions, and hid my face from them.


25 Therefore thus says the Lord GOD: Now I will restore the fortunes of Jacob and have mercy on the whole house of Israel, and I will be jealous for my holy name.
26 They shall forget their shame and all the treachery they have practiced against me, when they dwell securely in their land with none to make them afraid,
27 when I bring them back from the peoples and gather them from their enemies’ lands, and through them I show myself holy in the sight of many nations.
28 Then they shall know that I am the LORD their God, because I sent them into exile among the nations and then gathered them into their own land. I will leave none of them remaining among the nations anymore.
29 And I will not hide my face anymore from them, when I pour out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, declares the Lord GOD.




Chapter 40


1 In the twenty-fifth year of our exile, at the beginning of the year, on the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was struck down, on that very day the hand of the LORD was upon me, and he brought me there.
2 In visions of God he brought me to the land of Israel and set me down on a very high mountain, on which was a structure like a city to the south.
3 When he brought me there, I saw there was a man whose appearance was like bronze, with a linen cord and a measuring reed in his hand. And he was standing in the gateway.
4 And the man said to me, "Son of man, look with your eyes, and hear with your ears, and set your heart upon all that I shall show you; for you were brought here in order that I might show it to you. Declare all that you see to the house of Israel."


5 And I saw there was a wall all around the outside of the temple area, and in the man’s hand was a measuring reed of six long cubits, each being a cubit and a handbreadth. So he measured the thickness of the wall, one reed, and the height, one reed.
6 Then he went into the gateway facing east, going up its steps, and measured the threshold of the gate, one reed deep.
7 And the side chambers, one reed long and one reed broad; and the space between the side chambers, five cubits; and the threshold of the gate by the vestibule of the gate at the inner end, one reed.
8 Then he measured the vestibule of the gateway, eight cubits; and its jambs, two cubits; and the vestibule of the gate was at the inner end.
9 Then he measured the vestibule of the gate, eight cubits; and its jambs, two cubits. And the vestibule of the gate was at the inner end.
10 And there were three side chambers on either side of the east gate. The three were of the same size, and the jambs on either side were of the same size.
11 Then he measured the breadth of the opening of the gateway, ten cubits; and the length of the gateway, thirteen cubits.
12 There was a barrier before the side chambers of one cubit on either side, and the side chambers were six cubits on either side.
13 Then he measured the gate from the roof of one side chamber to the roof of the other, a breadth of twenty-five cubits; the openings faced each other.
14 He measured also the jambs, sixty cubits. And to the jamb was the court of the gate all around.
15 From the front of the gate at the entrance to the front of the inner vestibule of the gate was fifty cubits.
16 And the gateway had windows all around, narrowing inward toward the side chambers and toward their jambs, and likewise the vestibule had windows all around the inside. And on the jambs were palm trees.


17 Then he brought me into the outer court, and I saw there were chambers and a pavement, all around the court. Thirty chambers faced the pavement.
18 And the pavement ran along the side of the gates, corresponding to the length of the gates. This was the lower pavement.
19 Then he measured the distance from the inner front of the lower gate to the outer front of the inner court, one hundred cubits on the east side and on the north side.


20 As for the gate that faced toward the north, belonging to the outer court, he measured its length and its breadth.
21 Its side chambers, three on either side, and its jambs and its vestibule were of the same size as those of the first gate; its length was fifty cubits, and its breadth twenty-five cubits.
22 And its windows and its vestibule and its palm trees were of the same size as those of the gate that faced toward the east. And seven steps led up to it, and its vestibule was before them.
23 And opposite the gate on the north, as on the east, was a gate to the inner court. And he measured from gate to gate, one hundred cubits.


24 And he led me toward the south, and I saw there was a gate on the south. And he measured its jambs and its vestibule; they had the same size as the others.
25 And there were windows all around in it and in its vestibule, like the other windows. The length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
26 And there were seven steps leading up to it, and its vestibule was before them, and it had palm trees on its jambs, one on either side.
27 And there was a gate on the south of the inner court. And he measured from gate to gate on the south, one hundred cubits.


28 Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate, and he measured the south gate; it was of the same size as the others.
29 Its side chambers, its jambs, and its vestibule were of the same size as the others, and it had windows all around. The length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
30 And there were vestibules all around, twenty-five cubits long and five cubits broad.
31 Its vestibule faced the outer court, and palm trees were on its jambs, and its stairway had eight steps.


32 Then he brought me to the inner court on the east side, and he measured the gate; it was of the same size as the others.
33 Its side chambers, its jambs, and its vestibule were of the same size as the others, and it had windows all around. The length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
34 Its vestibule faced the outer court, and palm trees were on its jambs, on either side, and its stairway had eight steps.


35 Then he brought me to the north gate, and he measured it; it had the same size as the others,
36 its side chambers, its jambs, and its vestibule; and it had windows all around. The length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
37 Its vestibule faced the outer court, and palm trees were on its jambs, on either side, and its stairway had eight steps.


38 There was a chamber with its door by the vestibule of the gate, where the burnt offering was to be washed.
39 And in the vestibule of the gate were two tables on either side, on which the burnt offering and the sin offering and the guilt offering were to be slaughtered.
40 And on the outside of the vestibule, as one goes up to the entrance of the north gate, were two tables; and on the other side of the vestibule of the gate were two tables.
41 Four tables were on either side of the gate, eight tables, on which the sacrifices were to be slaughtered.
42 And there were four tables of hewn stone for the burnt offering, a cubit and a half long and a cubit and a half broad and one cubit high, on which the instruments were to be laid with which the burnt offerings and the sacrifices were slaughtered.
43 And hooks, a handbreadth long, were fastened all around within. And on the tables the flesh of the offering was to be laid.


44 On the outside of the inner gateway there were two chambers in the inner court, one at the side of the north gate facing south, the other at the side of the south gate facing north.
45 And he said to me, This chamber that faces south is for the priests who have charge of the temple,
46 and the chamber that faces north is for the priests who have charge of the altar. These are the sons of Zadok, who alone of the sons of Levi may come near to the LORD to minister to him.


47 And he measured the court, a square, one hundred cubits long and one hundred cubits broad. And the altar was in front of the temple.


48 Then he brought me to the vestibule of the temple and measured the jambs of the vestibule, five cubits on either side. And the breadth of the gate was fourteen cubits, and the sidewalls of the gate were three cubits on either side.
49 The length of the vestibule was twenty cubits, and the breadth twelve cubits, and people would go up to it by ten steps. And there were pillars beside the jambs, one on either side.




Chapter 41


1 Then he brought me to the nave and measured the jambs; six cubits broad on one side, and six cubits broad on the other side was the breadth of the jambs.
2 And the breadth of the entrance was ten cubits, and the sidewalls of the entrance were five cubits on either side. And he measured its length, forty cubits, and its breadth, twenty cubits.
3 Then he went inside and measured the jambs of the entrance, two cubits, and the entrance, six cubits, and the sidewalls of the entrance, seven cubits on either side.
4 And he measured the length of the room, twenty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits, beyond the nave. And he said to me, "This is the Most Holy Place."


5 Then he measured the wall of the temple, six cubits thick, and the breadth of the side chambers, four cubits, all around the temple.
6 And the side chambers were in three stories, one above the other, thirty in each story. There were offsets all around the wall of the temple to serve as supports for the side chambers, so that they should not be supported by the wall of the temple.
7 And it became broader as it wound upward to the side chambers, because the temple was enclosed upward all around the temple. Therefore the temple had a broad area upward, and so one went up from the lowest story to the top story through the middle story.
8 I also saw that the temple had a raised platform all around; the foundations of the side chambers measured a full reed of six long cubits.
9 The thickness of the outer wall of the side chambers was five cubits. The free space between the side chambers of the temple
10 and the other chambers was a breadth of twenty cubits all around the temple on every side.
11 And the doors of the side chambers opened on the free space, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south. And the breadth of the free space was five cubits all around.


12 The building that was facing the separate yard on the west side was seventy cubits broad, and the wall of the building was five cubits thick all around, and its length ninety cubits.
13 Then he measured the temple, one hundred cubits long; and the yard and the building with its walls, one hundred cubits long;
14 also the breadth of the east front of the temple and the yard, one hundred cubits.


15 Then he measured the length of the building facing the yard that was at the back, and its galleries on either side, one hundred cubits. The nave of the temple and the inner rooms and the vestibules of the court,
16 the thresholds and the narrow windows and the galleries all around the three of them, opposite the threshold, were paneled with wood all around, from the floor up to the windows (now the windows were covered),
17 to the space above the door, even to the inner room, and on the outside. And on all the walls all around, inside and outside, was a measured pattern.
18 It was carved of cherubim and palm trees, a palm tree between cherub and cherub. Every cherub had two faces:
19 the face of a man toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side. They were carved on all the temple all around.
20 From the floor to above the door, cherubim and palm trees were carved; thus the wall of the nave.


21 The doorposts of the nave were squared, and the front of the sanctuary was in appearance like the other.
22 The altar of wood was three cubits high, two cubits long, and two cubits broad. Its corners, its base, and its walls were of wood. And he said to me, This is the table that is before the LORD.
23 The nave and the sanctuary had two doors.
24 The doors had two leaves apiece, two swinging leaves for each door.
25 And on the doors of the nave were carved cherubim and palm trees, such as were carved on the walls. And there was a canopy of wood in front of the vestibule outside.
26 And there were narrow windows and palm trees on either side, on the sidewalls of the vestibule, the side chambers of the temple, and the canopies.




Chapter 42


1 Then he brought me out into the outer court, the way toward the north, and he brought me to the chamber that was opposite the separate yard and opposite the building to the north.
2 The length of the building facing north was one hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty cubits.
3 Opposite the twenty cubits that belonged to the inner court, and opposite the pavement that belonged to the outer court, was gallery against gallery in three stories.
4 And before the chambers ran a passage ten cubits broad inward, a way of one cubit; and their doors faced north.
5 Now the upper chambers were narrower, for the galleries took more away from them than from the lower and middle stories of the building.
6 For they were in three stories, and they had no pillars like the pillars of the courts. Therefore the upper chambers were set back more than the lower and the middle ones from the ground.
7 And the wall that was outside, opposite the chambers, toward the outer court facing the chambers, its length was fifty cubits.
8 For the chambers facing the outer court were fifty cubits long, while those opposite the temple were a hundred cubits long.
9 And below these chambers was an entrance on the east side, as one enters them from the outer court.


10 In the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, facing the separate yard and facing the building, there were chambers,
11 with a passage before them. They were similar to the chambers on the north, of the same length and breadth, with the same exits and arrangements and doors.
12 As were the doors of the chambers on the south, there was an entrance at the head of the passage, the passage before the corresponding wall toward the east, as one enters them.


13 Then he said to me, "The north chambers and the south chambers, which face the separate yard, are the holy chambers, where the priests who approach the LORD shall eat the most holy things. There they shall lay the most holy things, the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering, for the place is holy.
14 When the priests enter, they shall not go out of the holy place into the outer court without laying there the garments in which they minister, for they are holy. They shall put on other garments before they go near to that which belongs to the people."


15 Now when he had finished measuring the inner temple area, he brought me out by the gate that faced east, and measured it all around.
16 He measured on the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed all around.
17 He measured on the north side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed all around.
18 He measured on the south side, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed.
19 Then he turned to the west side and measured, five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
20 He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall all around, five hundred cubits long and five hundred cubits broad, to make a separation between the holy and the common.




Chapter 43


1 Then he brought me to the gate, the gate that faces east.
2 And suddenly the glory of the God of Israel was coming from the way of the east, and his voice was like the sound of many waters, and the earth shone with his glory.
3 The vision I saw was like the vision that I had seen when he came to destroy the city, and like the vision that I had seen by the river Chebar; and I fell on my face.
4 And the glory of the LORD came into the temple by the way of the gate that faces east.
5 The Spirit lifted me up and brought me into the inner court, and the glory of the LORD filled the temple.


6 Then I heard one speaking to me from the temple, while the man stood beside me.
7 And he said to me, Son of man, this is the place of my throne and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel forever. And the house of Israel shall no longer defile my holy name, neither they nor their kings, by their harlotry or by the corpses of their kings at their high places,
8 by setting their threshold by my threshold and their doorposts beside my doorposts, with only a wall between me and them. They defiled my holy name by the abominations they committed, so I consumed them in my anger.
9 Now let them put away their harlotry and the corpses of their kings far from me, and I will dwell in their midst forever.


10 As for you, son of man, describe the temple to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the plan.
11 And if they are ashamed of all that they have done, make known to them the design of the temple, its arrangement, its exits and entrances, its entire form, all its statutes and all its laws. Write it in their sight, so that they may observe its whole design and all its statutes, and perform them.
12 This is the law of the temple: upon the top of the mountain the whole area all around it shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the temple.


13 These are the measurements of the altar in cubits (the cubit being a cubit and a handbreadth): its base shall be a cubit high and a cubit broad, and its border on its edge all around one span. This shall be the height of the base of the altar.
14 From the base on the ground to the lower ledge, two cubits; and the breadth of the ledge, one cubit. From the smaller ledge to the larger ledge, four cubits; and the breadth of the ledge, one cubit.
15 The altar hearth shall be four cubits high, and from the altar hearth upward there shall be four horns.
16 The altar hearth shall be twelve cubits long by twelve broad, square in its four sides.
17 The ledge shall be fourteen cubits long by fourteen broad, on its four sides, with a border of half a cubit around it, and its base a cubit all around. And its steps shall face east.


18 And he said to me, Son of man, thus says the Lord GOD: These are the ordinances for the altar on the day it is made, for offering burnt offerings upon it and for sprinkling blood upon it.
19 You shall give to the Levitical priests of the seed of Zadok, who draw near to me to minister to me, declares the Lord GOD, a young bull for a sin offering.
20 You shall take some of its blood and put it on its four horns, on the four corners of the ledge, and upon the border all around; thus you shall cleanse it and make atonement for it.
21 You shall take the bull for the sin offering, and it shall be burned in the appointed place of the house, outside the sanctuary.
22 On the second day you shall offer a male goat without blemish for a sin offering, and they shall cleanse the altar as they cleansed it with the bull.
23 When you have finished cleansing it, you shall offer a young bull without blemish and a ram from the flock without blemish.
24 You shall offer them before the LORD, and the priests shall throw salt upon them, and they shall offer them up as a burnt offering to the LORD.


25 For seven days you shall prepare daily a goat for a sin offering. They shall also prepare a young bull and a ram from the flock, without blemish.
26 For seven days they shall make atonement for the altar and purify it, and so consecrate it.
27 When these days are completed, on the eighth day and onward the priests shall offer your burnt offerings and your peace offerings on the altar, and I will accept you, declares the Lord GOD.




Chapter 44


1 Then he brought me back by the way of the outer gate of the sanctuary, which faces east, and it was shut.
2 And the LORD said to me, This gate shall remain shut; it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter by it, for the LORD, the God of Israel, has entered by it; therefore it shall remain shut.
3 As for the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread before the LORD; he shall enter by way of the porch of the gate, and shall go out by the same way.


4 Then he brought me by the way of the north gate before the house, and I looked, and saw that the glory of the LORD filled the house of the LORD, and I fell on my face.
5 And the LORD said to me, Son of man, pay attention with your eyes, and listen with your ears to all that I say to you concerning all the statutes of the house of the LORD and all its laws. Pay attention to the entrance of the house and to all the exits of the sanctuary.


6 And you shall say to the rebellious house of Israel, Thus says the Lord GOD: Enough of all your abominations, O house of Israel,
7 in that you brought in foreigners, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to profane it, even my house, when you offered my food, the fat and the blood. Thus you have broken my covenant by all your abominations.
8 You have not kept charge of my holy things, but you have set others to keep my charge in my sanctuary in your place.


9 Thus says the Lord GOD: No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart or uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter my sanctuary, none of all the foreigners who are among the sons of Israel.


10 But the Levites who went far from me when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their idols, shall bear their punishment.
11 Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house and ministering in the house. They shall slaughter the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister to them.
12 Because they ministered to them before their idols and became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of Israel, therefore I have lifted my hand against them, declares the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their punishment.
13 They shall not come near to me to serve me as priests, nor come near any of my holy things or the most holy things; but they shall bear their shame and their abominations which they committed.
14 Yet I will appoint them as keepers of the charge of the house, for all its service and for all that is done in it.


15 But the Levitical priests, the sons of Zadok, who kept the charge of my sanctuary when the sons of Israel went astray from me, they shall come near to me to minister to me. They shall stand before me to offer to me the fat and the blood, declares the Lord GOD.
16 They shall enter my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table to minister to me, and they shall keep my charge.


17 And when they enter the gates of the inner court, they shall wear linen garments; they shall have no wool upon them while they minister in the gates of the inner court and within.
18 They shall have linen turbans upon their heads and linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not wear anything that causes sweat.
19 When they go out into the outer court, to the people, they shall take off the garments in which they minister and leave them in the holy chambers; and they shall put on other garments, so that they do not transmit holiness to the people with their garments.


20 They shall not shave their heads, nor let their hair grow long; they shall carefully trim their hair.
21 Neither shall any priest drink wine when he enters the inner court.
22 And they shall not take as wife a widow or one divorced from her husband, but only a virgin of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.
23 And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the common, and show them how to discern between the unclean and the clean.
24 In a dispute, they shall stand as judges, and judge it according to my ordinances. They shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts, and they shall sanctify my Sabbaths.


25 They shall not come near any dead man to defile themselves; however, for father or for mother, for son or for daughter, for brother or for sister who has had no husband, they may defile themselves.
26 And after he is cleansed, they shall count seven days for him.
27 And on the day that he goes into the sanctuary, into the inner court to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, declares the Lord GOD.


28 And it shall be for them as an inheritance: I am their inheritance, and you shall give them no possession in Israel; I am their possession.
29 They shall eat the grain offering, the sin offering, and the guilt offering; and every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs.
30 The first of all the firstfruits of every kind, and every contribution of every kind from all your contributions, shall belong to the priests; you shall also give the priest the first of your dough, that a blessing may rest upon your house.
31 The priests shall not eat any bird or animal that has died naturally or been torn by beasts.




Chapter 45


1 When you allot the land as an inheritance, you shall set apart a contribution to the LORD, a holy portion of the land. Its length shall be twenty-five thousand cubits, and its width ten thousand. It shall be holy throughout its entire extent.
2 Of this there shall be for the sanctuary a square five hundred by five hundred cubits, with fifty cubits of open space around it.
3 From this measured area you shall measure a length of twenty-five thousand and a width of ten thousand. In it shall be the sanctuary, the most holy place.
4 It shall be the holy portion of the land; it shall belong to the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who draw near to minister to the LORD. It shall be a place for their houses and a holy place for the sanctuary.
5 An area twenty-five thousand long and ten thousand wide shall belong to the Levites, the ministers of the house. They shall have twenty chambers as their possession.


6 You shall also assign a possession for the city, five thousand wide and twenty-five thousand long, beside the holy contribution; it shall belong to all the house of Israel.


7 And the prince shall have the land on both sides of the holy contribution and the possession of the city, alongside the holy contribution and the city possession, on the west and on the east. Its length shall correspond to one of the tribal portions, from the western border to the eastern border.
8 This shall be his land as his possession in Israel. And my princes shall no longer oppress my people, but they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.


9 Thus says the Lord GOD: Enough, O princes of Israel! Remove violence and oppression, and execute justice and righteousness. Stop your evictions of my people, declares the Lord GOD.
10 You shall have honest scales, an honest ephah, and an honest bath.
11 The ephah and the bath shall be of the same measure, so that the bath may contain a tenth of a homer, and the ephah a tenth of a homer; their measure shall be according to the homer.
12 The shekel shall be twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels, and fifteen shekels shall be your mina.


13 This is the contribution that you shall make: a sixth of an ephah from each homer of wheat, and a sixth of an ephah from each homer of barley,
14 and as the fixed portion of oil, one-tenth of a bath from each cor of oil (the cor is a homer of ten baths, for ten baths are a homer),
15 and one sheep from each flock of two hundred, from the watering places of Israel, for a grain offering, a burnt offering, and peace offerings, to make atonement for them, declares the Lord GOD.
16 All the people of the land shall contribute to this offering for the prince in Israel.


17 It shall be the prince’s duty to provide the burnt offerings, the grain offerings, and the drink offerings, at the feasts, the new moons, and the Sabbaths, at all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel. He shall provide the sin offering, the grain offering, the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.


18 Thus says the Lord GOD: In the first month, on the first day of the month, you shall take a young bull without blemish and cleanse the sanctuary.
19 The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering and put it on the doorposts of the house, on the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and on the doorposts of the gate of the inner court.
20 And so you shall do on the seventh day of the month for everyone who sins unintentionally or through ignorance; so you shall make atonement for the house.


21 In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, you shall observe the Passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be eaten.
22 On that day the prince shall provide for himself and for all the people of the land a bull for a sin offering.
23 And during the seven days of the feast he shall provide seven bulls and seven rams without blemish daily as a burnt offering to the LORD, and a male goat daily for a sin offering.
24 He shall provide as a grain offering an ephah for each bull, an ephah for each ram, and a hin of oil for each ephah.


25 In the seventh month, on the fifteenth day of the month, at the feast, he shall provide like these, for seven days, for the sin offering, the burnt offering, the grain offering, and the oil.




Chapter 46


1 Thus says the Lord GOD: The gate of the inner court that faces east shall be shut during the six working days, but on the Sabbath day it shall be opened, and on the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
2 The prince shall enter by way of the porch of the gate from outside and shall stand by the gatepost, while the priests prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate and then go out; but the gate shall not be shut until evening.
3 The people of the land shall also worship at the entrance of that gate before the LORD on the Sabbaths and on the new moons.


4 The burnt offering that the prince shall offer to the LORD on the Sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish and a ram without blemish.
5 And the grain offering shall be an ephah for the ram, and the grain offering for the lambs as much as he is able to give, and a hin of oil for each ephah.
6 On the day of the new moon he shall offer a young bull without blemish, six lambs, and a ram; all without blemish.
7 And he shall provide a grain offering, an ephah for the bull, an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs as much as he is able to give, and a hin of oil for each ephah.


8 When the prince enters, he shall go in by way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go out by the same way.
9 But when the people of the land come before the LORD at the appointed feasts, he who enters by the north gate to worship shall go out by the south gate, and he who enters by the south gate shall go out by the north gate. He shall not return by way of the gate through which he entered, but shall go out opposite it.
10 The prince shall be in their midst; when they go in, he shall go in, and when they go out, he shall go out.


11 At the feasts and the appointed seasons, the grain offering shall be an ephah for a bull, an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as much as he is able to give, and a hin of oil for each ephah.
12 When the prince provides a freewill offering, either a burnt offering or peace offerings as a freewill offering to the LORD, the gate facing east shall be opened for him, and he shall offer his burnt offering and his peace offerings as he does on the Sabbath day. Then he shall go out, and after he has gone out, the gate shall be shut.


13 You shall provide a lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering to the LORD daily; morning by morning you shall provide it.
14 You shall also provide a grain offering with it morning by morning, one-sixth of an ephah, and one-third of a hin of oil to moisten the fine flour, a grain offering to the LORD continually, a perpetual statute.
15 Thus they shall provide the lamb, the grain offering, and the oil morning by morning, as a continual burnt offering.


16 Thus says the Lord GOD: If the prince gives a gift to any of his sons, it shall belong to his sons; it is their possession by inheritance.
17 But if he gives a gift from his inheritance to one of his servants, it shall belong to him until the year of liberty; then it shall return to the prince. His inheritance shall belong to his sons; it shall be theirs.
18 The prince shall not take any of the people’s inheritance by oppression, thrusting them out of their possession; he shall give his sons their inheritance from his own possession, so that none of my people shall be scattered from his possession.


19 Then he brought me through the entrance, which was at the side of the gate, to the holy chambers of the priests, which faced north; and I saw that there was a place at the far west end.
20 He said to me, This is the place where the priests shall boil the guilt offering and the sin offering, and where they shall bake the grain offering, so that they do not bring them out into the outer court and so transmit holiness to the people.


21 Then he brought me out into the outer court and led me across to the four corners of the court; and in every corner of the court there was another court.
22 In the four corners of the court there were enclosed courts, forty cubits long and thirty wide; these four corner courts were of the same size.
23 Around inside them was a ledge of stone all around, and boiling places were made under the ledges all around.
24 Then he said to me, These are the kitchens where those who minister at the house shall boil the sacrifices of the people.




Chapter 47


1 Then he brought me back to the entrance of the house, and I saw that water was flowing from under the threshold of the house toward the east, for the front of the house faced east. The water was flowing down from under the right side of the house, south of the altar.
2 Then he brought me out by way of the north gate and led me around on the outside to the outer gate that faces east; and I saw that water was trickling out on the right side.
3 When the man went out eastward with the measuring line in his hand, he measured a thousand cubits, and led me through the water, water that was ankle-deep.
4 Again he measured a thousand and led me through the water, water that was knee-deep. Again he measured a thousand and led me through water that was waist-deep.
5 Again he measured a thousand, and it was a river that I could not cross, for the water had risen. It was deep enough to swim in, a river that could not be crossed.
6 And he said to me, Son of man, have you seen this? Then he brought me back along the bank of the river.


7 When I returned, I saw that on the bank of the river there were very many trees on one side and on the other.
8 Then he said to me, This water flows toward the eastern region and goes down into the Arabah, and enters the sea. When it enters the sea, the waters will be healed.
9 And every living creature that swarms wherever the river goes will live, and there will be very many fish, for this water goes there, and the waters of the sea are healed, and everything will live wherever the river goes.
10 And it will come to pass that fishermen will stand beside it; from En-gedi to En-eglaim they will spread out nets. Their fish will be of many kinds, like the fish of the Great Sea - exceedingly many.
11 But its swamps and its marshes will not become fresh; they will be left for salt.
12 And by the river on its banks, on one side and on the other, will grow every kind of tree for food. Their leaves will not wither, nor their fruit fail. They will bear fresh fruit every month, because the water for them flows from the sanctuary. Their fruit will be for food and their leaves for healing.


13 Thus says the Lord GOD: This shall be the boundary by which you shall divide the land for inheritance among the twelve tribes of Israel. Joseph shall have two portions.
14 You shall divide it equally, each one like his brother, for I swore to give it to your fathers, and this land shall fall to you as your inheritance.


15 This shall be the boundary of the land: On the north side, from the Great Sea by the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Zedad,
16 Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which lies between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath, as far as Hazer-hatticon, which is on the border of Hauran.
17 So the boundary shall be from the sea to Hazar-enan, on the border of Damascus, with the border of Hamath to the north. This is the north side.


18 On the east side, between Hauran and Damascus, along the Jordan, between Gilead and the land of Israel, you shall measure from the north border to the eastern sea. This is the east side.


19 On the south side, toward the south, it shall be from Tamar as far as the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the Brook of Egypt and to the Great Sea. This is the south side toward the south.


20 On the west side, the Great Sea shall be the boundary to a point opposite Lebo-hamath. This is the west side.


21 So you shall divide this land among you according to the tribes of Israel.
22 You shall divide it by lot for an inheritance for yourselves and for the foreigners who reside among you and who have begotten children among you. They shall be to you as native-born among the sons of Israel; with you they shall be allotted an inheritance among the tribes of Israel.
23 In whatever tribe the foreigner resides, there you shall give him his inheritance, declares the Lord GOD.




Chapter 48


1 Now these are the names of the tribes: Beginning from the northern frontier beside the way of Hethlon to Lebo-hamath, as far as Hazar-enan at the border of Damascus toward the north beside Hamath, they shall have sides from the east side to the west side—Dan, one portion.


2 Beside the territory of Dan, from the east side to the west side—Asher, one portion.
3 Beside the territory of Asher, from the east side to the west side—Naphtali, one portion.
4 Beside the territory of Naphtali, from the east side to the west side—Manasseh, one portion.
5 Beside the territory of Manasseh, from the east side to the west side—Ephraim, one portion.
6 Beside the territory of Ephraim, from the east side to the west side—Reuben, one portion.
7 Beside the territory of Reuben, from the east side to the west side—Judah, one portion.


8 Beside the territory of Judah, from the east side to the west side, shall be the contribution that you shall offer: twenty-five thousand cubits in breadth, and in length the same as one of the portions, from the east side to the west side; the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.


9 The portion that you shall offer to the LORD shall be twenty-five thousand in length and ten thousand in breadth.
10 And these shall be the allotments for the holy portion: for the priests, on the north twenty-five thousand in length, and on the west ten thousand in breadth, and on the east ten thousand in breadth, and on the south twenty-five thousand in length; and the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst of it.
11 It shall be for the priests who are sanctified of the sons of Zadok, who kept charge of My sanctuary when the sons of Israel went astray from Me; they shall have it as a most holy portion beside the territory of the Levites.


12 And alongside the border of the priests the Levites shall have twenty-five thousand in length and ten thousand in breadth; the whole length shall be twenty-five thousand and the breadth ten thousand.
13 And they shall not sell or exchange any of it; they shall not alienate the firstfruits of the land, for it is holy to the LORD.


14 The five thousand that are left in breadth over against the twenty-five thousand shall be for common use, for the city, for dwellings, and for pasture land; and the city shall be in its midst.
15 These shall be its measurements: the north side four thousand five hundred, the south side four thousand five hundred, the east side four thousand five hundred, and the west side four thousand five hundred.
16 And the pasture land of the city shall extend two hundred fifty cubits to the north, two hundred fifty cubits to the south, two hundred fifty cubits to the east, and two hundred fifty cubits to the west.


17 The remainder in length alongside the holy contribution shall be ten thousand eastward and ten thousand westward; it shall be alongside the holy contribution, and its produce shall be food for those who serve the city.
18 And those who serve the city shall serve it from all the tribes of Israel.
19 The whole contribution shall be twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand; you shall set apart the holy contribution, along with the possession of the city.


20 The remainder on both sides of the holy contribution and the possession of the city shall belong to the prince, extending on the west side and on the east side of the twenty-five thousand of the contribution as far as the borders of the tribal portions; it shall belong to the prince, and the holy contribution and the sanctuary of the house shall be in its midst.
21 Moreover, from the possession of the Levites and the possession of the city, which are in the midst of that which belongs to the prince, the area between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin shall belong to the prince.


22 As for the rest of the tribes: from the east side to the west side—Benjamin, one portion.
23 Beside the territory of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side—Simeon, one portion.
24 Beside the territory of Simeon, from the east side to the west side—Issachar, one portion.
25 Beside the territory of Issachar, from the east side to the west side—Zebulun, one portion.
26 Beside the territory of Zebulun, from the east side to the west side—Gad, one portion.


27 And beside the territory of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the Brook of Egypt, to the Great Sea.
28 This is the land that you shall allot as an inheritance among the tribes of Israel, and these are their portions, declares the Lord GOD.


29 These are the exits of the city: On the north side, which is four thousand five hundred cubits in length,
30 three gates: the gate of Reuben, the gate of Judah, and the gate of Levi—the gates of the city shall be named after the tribes of Israel.


31 On the east side, four thousand five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Joseph, the gate of Benjamin, and the gate of Dan.


32 On the south side, four thousand five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Simeon, the gate of Issachar, and the gate of Zebulun.


33 On the west side, four thousand five hundred cubits, three gates: the gate of Gad, the gate of Asher, and the gate of Naphtali.


34 The circumference of the city shall be eighteen thousand cubits; and the name of the city from that day shall be, "The LORD Is There."