Obadiah


Chapter 1


1 The vision of Obadiah.
Thus says the Lord GOD concerning Edom:
We have heard a report from the LORD,
and an envoy has been sent among the nations:
“Rise up, and let us rise against her for battle!”
2 Behold, I will make you small among the nations;
you shall be utterly despised.
3 The pride of your heart has deceived you,
you who dwell in the clefts of the rock,
whose habitation is lofty.
Who can say in his heart,
“Who will bring me down to the ground?”
4 Though you soar aloft like the eagle,
and though your nest is set among the stars,
from there I will bring you down,
declares the LORD.


5 If thieves came to you,
if plunderers came by night—
how you have been destroyed!—
would they not steal only what they wanted?
If grape gatherers came to you,
would they not leave gleanings?
6 How Esau has been pillaged,
his hidden treasures sought out!
7 All your allies have driven you to the border;
your confederates have deceived you and prevailed against you;
those who eat your bread have set a trap beneath you—
you have no understanding.
8 Will I not on that day,
declares the LORD,
destroy the wise men out of Edom,
and understanding out of Mount Esau?
9 And your mighty men shall be dismayed, O Teman,
so that every man from Mount Esau
will be cut off by slaughter.
10 Because of the violence against your brother Jacob,
shame shall cover you,
and you shall be cut off forever.


11 On the day that you stood aloof,
on the day that strangers carried off his wealth,
and foreigners entered his gates
and cast lots for Jerusalem,
you were like one of them.
12 But you should not have gloated over your brother
on the day of his misfortune,
and you should not have rejoiced over the sons of Judah
on the day of their destruction,
and you should not have spoken arrogantly
on the day of distress.
13 You should not have entered the gate of my people
on the day of their disaster;
you should not have looked with gloating on his calamity
on the day of his disaster,
nor laid hands on his wealth
on the day of his disaster.
14 You should not have stood at the crossroads
to cut down his fugitives;
you should not have handed over his survivors
on the day of distress.


15 For the day of the LORD is near all the nations.
As you have done, it shall be done to you;
your deeds shall return upon your own head.
16 For just as you have drunk on my holy mountain,
so shall all the nations drink continually;
they shall drink and gulp down,
and shall be as though they had never been.
17 But on Mount Zion there shall be those who escape,
and it shall be holy,
and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.
18 The house of Jacob shall be a fire,
and the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau stubble;
they shall burn them and consume them,
and there shall be no survivor for the house of Esau,
for the LORD has spoken.


19 Those of the Negev shall possess Mount Esau,
and those of the Shephelah the land of the Philistines;
they shall possess the territory of Ephraim and the territory of Samaria,
and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
20 And the exiles of this host of the sons of Israel
shall possess the land of the Canaanites as far as Zarephath,
and the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad
shall possess the cities of the Negev.
21 Deliverers shall go up to Mount Zion
to judge the mountain of Esau,
and the kingdom shall be the LORD’s.