Jonah


Chapter 1


1 The word of the LORD came to Jonah son of Amittai, saying,
2 “Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry out against it, for their evil has come up before Me.”


3 But Jonah rose to flee to Tarshish from the presence of the LORD. He went down to Joppa and found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the fare and went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish, away from the presence of the LORD.
4 But the LORD hurled a great wind upon the sea, and there was a mighty storm on the sea, so that they thought the ship would break apart.
5 Then the sailors were afraid, and each cried out to his god. And they hurled the cargo that was in the ship into the sea to lighten it for them. But Jonah had gone down into the innermost part of the ship and had lain down and fallen fast asleep.
6 So the captain came to him and said, “Why are you sleeping? Arise, call on your god! Perhaps the god you serve will consider our situation, and we would not perish.”


7 Then they said to one another, “Come, let us cast lots, that we may know who caused this evil to come upon us.” So they cast lots, and the lot fell on Jonah.
8 Then they said to him, “Tell us, now—on whose account has this evil come upon us? What is your occupation, and where do you come from? What is your country, and from what people are you?”
9 And he said to them, “I am a Hebrew, and I fear the LORD, the God of heaven, who made the sea and the dry land.”
10 Then the men were exceedingly afraid and said to him, “What have you done?” For the men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of the LORD, because he had told them.


11 Then they said to him, “What should we do to you, that the sea may quiet down for us?” For the sea was growing more and more stormy.
12 And he said to them, “Pick me up and hurl me into the sea; then the sea will quiet down for you. For I realize that it is because of me that this great storm has come upon you.”


13 Nevertheless, the men rowed hard to return to dry land, but they could not, for the sea grew more and more stormy against them.
14 Then they cried out to the LORD and said, “O LORD, please do not let us perish because of this man’s life, and do not lay upon us innocent blood, for You, O LORD, have done as it pleased You.”


15 So they picked up Jonah and hurled him into the sea, and the sea stopped its raging.
16 Then the men had great reverence for the LORD, and they offered a sacrifice to the LORD and made vows.




Chapter 2


1 Then Jonah prayed to the LORD his God from the belly of the fish,
2 and he said:
“I called out to the LORD in my distress, and He answered me;
out of the belly of the grave I cried for help, and You heard my voice.
3 For You cast me into the deep, into the heart of the seas,
and the current surrounded me;
all Your breakers and Your waves passed over me.
4 Then I said, ‘I am driven out from before Your eyes;
yet I will again look toward Your holy temple.’
5 The waters closed in over me, even to threaten my life;
the deep surrounded me;
weeds were wrapped around my head
6 at the roots of the mountains.
I went down to the land whose bars closed upon me forever;
yet You brought up my life from the pit, O LORD my God.
7 When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the LORD,
and my prayer came to You, into Your holy temple.
8 Those who cling to worthless idols forsake their loyalty,
9 but I, with the voice of thanksgiving, will sacrifice to You;
what I have vowed I will fulfill.
Salvation belongs to the LORD.”


10 And the LORD spoke to the fish, and it vomited Jonah out onto dry land.




Chapter 3


1 Then the word of the LORD came to Jonah a second time, saying,
2 “Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and proclaim to it the proclamation that I speak to you.”
3 So Jonah arose and went to Nineveh according to the word of the LORD. Now Nineveh was an exceedingly great city—a three-day journey across.
4 Jonah began to enter the city on a day's journey, and he cried out and said, “Yet forty days, and Nineveh will be destroyed!”
5 And the men of Nineveh believed God. They called for a fast and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them to the least of them.


6 When the word reached the king of Nineveh, he arose from his throne, took off his robe, covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
7 Then he issued a proclamation in Nineveh, saying, “By decree of the king and his nobles: No man or beast, herd or flock, shall taste anything. They shall not eat or drink water.
8 But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth. Let them call out mightily to God. Let each turn from his evil way and from the violence that is in his hands.
9 Who knows? God may turn and relent, and turn from His burning anger, so that we do not perish.”


10 And God saw their deeds—that they turned from their evil ways—and God relented of the disaster that He had said He would do to them, and He did not do it.




Chapter 4


1 But it greatly displeased Jonah, and he became angry.
2 He prayed to the LORD and said, “O LORD, was this not what I said while I was still in my land? That is why I fled to Tarshish earlier. For I knew that You are a gracious and compassionate God, slow to anger and abounding in steadfast love, and one who relents from sending disaster.
3 So now, LORD, please take my life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.”
4 And the LORD said, “Is it right for you to be angry?”


5 Then Jonah went out of the city and sat to the east of the city. There he made for himself a shelter and sat under it in the shade, until he should see what would become of the city.
6 And the LORD God appointed a plant, and it grew up over Jonah to provide shade for his head, to deliver him from his discomfort. So Jonah was exceedingly glad because of the plant.


7 But at dawn the next day, God appointed a worm, and it attacked the plant, and it withered.
8 And when the sun rose, God appointed a scorching east wind, and the sun beat down on Jonah’s head, so that he grew faint. And he asked to die, and said, “It is better for me to die than to live.”
9 Then God said to Jonah, “Is it right for you to be angry about the plant?” And he said, “It is right for me to be angry—angry enough to die.”


10 And the LORD said, “You have shown pity on the plant for which you did not labor, and which you did not cause to grow, which came into being in a night and perished in a night.
11 And should I not show pity on Nineveh, that great city, in which there are more than one hundred twenty thousand men who do not know their right hand from their left, and also many beasts?”