Habakkuk


Chapter 1


1 The oracle that Habakkuk the prophet saw:
2 How long, O LORD, shall I cry for help, and You do not hear? I cry out to You, “Violence!” and You do not save.
3 Why do You make me see iniquity, and why do You idly look at trouble? Destruction and violence are before me; strife arises, and contention escalates.
4 Therefore the law is paralyzed, and justice never goes forth. For the wicked surround the righteous causing justice to come out perverted.
5 “Look among the nations, and see; be astonished, be utterly amazed! For I am doing a work in your days that you would not believe if it were told.
6 For you will see me raising up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, who march through the breadth of the earth to seize dwellings not their own.
7 They are dreadful and fearsome; their justice and dignity go forth from themselves.
8 Their horses are swifter than leopards, fiercer than wolves at dusk. Their horsemen gallop; their horsemen come from afar; they fly like an eagle swooping to devour.
9 All of them come for violence, their faces set forward. They gather captives like sand.
10 They scoff at kings, and rulers are a joke to them. They laugh at every fortress, for they heap up earth and capture it.
11 Then they sweep by like the wind and go on—guilty men, whose own strength is their god!”


12 Are You not from everlasting, O LORD my God, my Holy One? We shall not die. O LORD, You have appointed them for judgment, and You, O Rock, have established them for reproof.
13 You, whose eyes are too pure to look upon evil, and who cannot look on wrong—why do You look on traitors and remain silent when the wicked swallows up the man more righteous than he?
14 You make mankind like the fish of the sea, like crawling things that have no ruler over them.
15 He brings all of them up with a hook; he drags them out with his net; he gathers them in his dragnet, so he rejoices and is glad.
16 Therefore he sacrifices to his net and burns incense to his dragnet, for by them his portion is fat, and his food is rich.
17 Shall he then empty his net and keep on slaying nations without mercy?




Chapter 2


1 I will stand at my watchpost and station myself on the rampart; I will keep watch to see what He will say to me, and what I will answer concerning my complaint.
2 And the LORD answered me and said: “Write the vision and make it plain on tablets, so that the one who reads it may run.
3 For the vision is yet for the appointed time; it speaks of the end and does not lie. If it delays, wait for it; for it will surely come—it will not be late.


4 See how his soul is puffed up—it is not upright in him; but the righteous shall live by his faithfulness.
5 Moreover, wine is a traitor, an arrogant man who is never at rest. He enlarges his desire like the grave, and like death he never has enough. He gathers for himself all the nations and collects for himself all the peoples.”
6 Shall not all these take up a taunt against him, with riddles and mocking sayings, and say: “Woe to him who heaps up what is not his—how long?—and loads himself with pledges”?
7 Will not your creditors suddenly rise, and those who make you tremble awake? Then you will become spoil for them.
8 Because you have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples shall plunder you—for the blood of man and violence to the land, to the city and all who dwell in it.
9 Woe to him who obtains ill-gotten gain for his house, to set his nest on high, to escape from the grasp of disaster!
10 You have devised shame for your house by cutting off many peoples; you have forfeited your life.
11 For the stone will cry out from the wall, and the beam from the timber will answer it.
12 Woe to him who builds a city with blood and founds a town by iniquity!
13 Is it not from the LORD of hosts that peoples labor only for fire, and nations weary themselves for nothing?
14 For the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the LORD as the waters cover the sea.
15 Woe to him who makes his neighbor drink—mixing in your wrath and making them drunk, to gaze upon their nakedness!
16 You will be filled with shame rather than glory. Drink, you too, and expose your uncircumcision! The cup in the LORD’s right hand will come around to you, and disgrace will cover your glory.
17 For the violence done to Lebanon will overwhelm you, and the destruction of beasts will terrify you—for the blood of man and violence to the land, to the city and all who dwell in it.
18 What profit is an idol when its maker has shaped it—a cast image, a teacher of lies? For the one who forms it trusts in what he has made, when he fashions speechless idols!
19 Woe to him who says to wood, “Awake!” or to silent stone, “Arise!” Can it teach? You see how it is overlaid with gold and silver, but there is no breath at all in it.


20 But the LORD is in His holy temple; let all the earth be silent before Him.




Chapter 3


1 A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, according to Shigionoth.
2 LORD, I have heard the report about You;
I stand in awe, LORD, of Your work.
In the midst of the years, revive it;
in the midst of the years, make it known;
in wrath, remember mercy.
3 God came from Teman,
the Holy One from Mount Paran. Selah.
His splendor covered the heavens,
and the earth was full of His praise.
4 His radiance was like the light;
rays came from His hand,
and there His power was hidden.
5 Before Him went pestilence,
and plague followed at His heels.
6 He stood and measured the earth;
He looked and made the nations tremble.
The eternal mountains were shattered;
the ancient hills sank low.
His paths are everlasting.


7 I saw the tents of Cushan in distress;
the tent curtains of the land of Midian trembled.
8 Was Your anger against the rivers, LORD?
Was Your wrath against the rivers,
or Your rage against the sea,
when You rode on Your horses,
on Your chariots of salvation?
9 You uncovered Your bow;
You called for many arrows. Selah.
You split the earth with rivers.
10 The mountains saw You and writhed;
a torrent of water passed by.
The deep roared and lifted its waves high.
11 Sun and moon stood still in their lofty abode,
at the light of Your arrows as they sped,
at the gleam of Your flashing spear.
12 In fury You marched through the earth;
in anger You threshed the nations.
13 You went out for the salvation of
Your people, for the salvation of Your anointed.
You struck the head of the house of the wicked,
laying him bare from thigh to neck. Selah.


14 With his own spears You pierced the heads of his warriors,
who came like a whirlwind to scatter me,
gloating as if to devour the afflicted in secret.
15 You trampled the sea with Your horses,
the surging of mighty waters.
16 I heard, and my inward parts trembled;
at the sound, my lips quivered.
Rottenness entered into my bones,
and I trembled where I stood,
because I must quietly wait for the day of distress
to come upon the people who invade us.
17 Though the fig tree does not blossom,
and there is no fruit on the vines,
though the yield of the olive fails,
and the fields produce no food,
though the flock is cut off from the fold,
and there are no cattle in the stalls,
18 yet I will rejoice in the LORD;
I will exult in the God of my salvation.
19 The Lord GOD is my strength;
He makes my feet like the feet of a deer
and makes me tread upon my high places.
To the choirmaster: with stringed instruments.