Malachi


Chapter 1


1 The oracle of the word of the LORD to Israel by the hand of Malachi.
2 “I have loved you,” says the LORD.
But you say, “How have You loved us?”
“Was not Esau Jacob’s brother?” declares the LORD.
“Yet I loved Jacob,
3 but Esau I hated.
I made his mountains a desolation
and gave his inheritance to the jackals of the wilderness.”
4 If Edom says, “We are shattered,
but we will rebuild the ruins,”
thus says the LORD of hosts:
“They may build, but I will tear down,
and they will be called ‘The Wicked Territory,’
and ‘The people with whom the LORD is angry forever.’”
5 Your eyes shall see this, and you shall say,
“Great is the LORD beyond the border of Israel!”


6 A son honors his father,
and a servant, his master.
If then I am a father, where is My honor?
And if I am a master, where is My fear?
says the LORD of hosts to you,
O priests who despise My name.
But you say, “How have we despised Your name?”
7 You offer defiled food on My altar.
But you say, “How have we defiled You?”
By saying that the table of the LORD is to be despised.
8 When you present the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil?
And when you present the lame and the sick, is it not evil?
Bring it now to your governor—will he be pleased with you
or show you favor? says the LORD of hosts.


9 And now, entreat the favor of God, that He may be gracious to us.
With such a gift from your hand,
will He show favor to any of you? says the LORD of hosts.


10 Oh that there were one among you
who would shut the doors,
that you might not kindle fire on My altar in vain!
I have no pleasure in you, says the LORD of hosts,
and I will not accept an offering from your hand.


11 For from the rising of the sun to its setting,
My name will be great among the nations,
and in every place incense is offered to My name,
and a pure offering.
For My name will be great among the nations,
says the LORD of hosts.


12 But you profane it when you say,
“The table of the LORD is defiled,
and its fruit—that is, its food—is to be despised.”


13 But you say, “Look, what a weariness this is,”
and you sniff at it, says the LORD of hosts.
You bring what has been taken by violence,
or is lame or sick—
and this you bring as an offering!
Shall I accept this from your hand? says the LORD.
14 Cursed be the deceiver who has a male in his flock,
and vows it, yet sacrifices to the LORD what is blemished.
For I am a great King, says the LORD of hosts,
and My name will be feared among the nations.




Chapter 2


1 And now, O priests, this command is for you.
2 If you will not listen,
if you will not lay it to heart to give honor to My name,
says the LORD of hosts,
then I will send the curse upon you,
and I will curse your blessings;
indeed, I have already cursed them,
because you do not lay it to heart.
3 See, I will rebuke your offspring,
and spread dung on your faces,
the dung of your festival offerings,
and you shall be taken away with it.


4 So you shall know that I have sent this command to you,
that My covenant with Levi may stand,
says the LORD of hosts.
5 My covenant with him was one of life and peace,
and I gave them to him for fear,
and he feared Me;
he stood in awe of My name.
6 True instruction was in his mouth,
and no injustice was found on his lips.
He walked with Me in peace and uprightness,
and he turned many from iniquity.
7 For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge,
and men should seek instruction from his mouth,
for he is the messenger of the LORD of hosts.


8 But you have turned aside from the way;
you have caused many to stumble by your instruction.
You have corrupted the covenant of Levi,
says the LORD of hosts.
9 So I make you despised and low
before all the people,
inasmuch as you do not keep My ways
but show partiality in your instruction.
10 Have we not all one father?
Has not one God created us?
Why then are we faithless to one another,
profaning the covenant of our fathers?
11 Judah has been faithless,
and abomination has been committed in Israel and in Jerusalem.
For Judah has profaned the sanctuary of the LORD, which He loves,
and has married the daughter of a foreign god.
12 May the LORD cut off from the tents of Jacob
any man who does this,
who brings an offering to the LORD of hosts.


13 And this second thing you do:
You cover the altar of the LORD with tears,
with weeping and groaning
because He no longer regards the offering
or accepts it with favor from your hand.
14 But you say, “Why doesn't He?”
Because the LORD was witness between you and the wife of your youth,
to whom you have been faithless,
though she is your companion and your wife by covenant.
15 Did He not make them one,
with a portion of the Spirit in their union?
And what was the one God seeking?
Godly offspring.
So guard yourselves in your spirit,
and let none of you be faithless to the wife of your youth.
16 “For I hate divorce,” says the LORD, the God of Israel,
“and him who covers his garment with violence,”
says the LORD of hosts.
So guard yourselves in your spirit,
and do not be faithless.


17 You have wearied the LORD with your words.
But you say, “How have we wearied Him?”
By saying, “Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of the LORD,
and He delights in them,”
or by asking, “Where is the God of justice?”




Chapter 3


1 Behold, I am sending My messenger,
and he will prepare the way before Me.
And the Lord whom you seek will suddenly come to His temple;
and the messenger of the covenant in whom you delight,
behold, He is coming,
says the LORD of hosts.
2 But who can endure the day of His coming,
and who can stand when He appears?
For He is like a refiner’s fire
and like fullers’ soap.
3 He will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver,
and He will purify the sons of Levi
and refine them like gold and silver,
and they will bring offerings in righteousness to the LORD.
4 Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem will be pleasing to the LORD
as in the days of old and as in former years.
5 Then I will draw near to you for judgment.
I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers,
against the adulterers,
against those who swear falsely,
against those who oppress the hired worker in his wages,
the widow and the orphan,
against those who turn aside the foreigner and do not fear Me,
says the LORD of hosts.
6 For I, the LORD, do not change;
therefore you, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.


7 From the days of your fathers you have turned aside from My statutes
and have not kept them.
Return to Me, and I will return to you,
says the LORD of hosts.
But you say, “How shall we return?”
8 Will a man rob God?
Yet you are robbing Me.
But you say, “How have we robbed You?”
In tithes and offerings.
9 You are cursed with a curse,
for you are robbing Me,
the whole nation of you.
10 Bring the full tithe into the storehouse,
that there may be food in My house.
And test Me now in this,
says the LORD of hosts,
if I will not open the windows of heaven for you
and pour down for you a blessing
until there is no more need.
11 I will rebuke the devourer for you,
so that it will not destroy the fruits of your soil,
and your vine in the field shall not fail to bear,
says the LORD of hosts.
12 Then all the nations will call you blessed,
for you will be a land of delight,
says the LORD of hosts.


13 Your words have been harsh against Me,
says the LORD.
But you say, “What have we spoken against You?”
14 You have said, “It is vain to serve God.
What is the profit of our keeping His charge
or of walking as mourners before the LORD of hosts?
15 And now we call the arrogant blessed.
Evildoers not only prosper
but they put God to the test and they escape.”
16 Then those who feared the LORD spoke with one another.
The LORD paid attention and heard them,
and a book of remembrance was written before Him
of those who feared the LORD and esteemed His name.
17 “They shall be Mine,” says the LORD of hosts,
“in the day when I make up My treasured possession,
and I will spare them as a man spares his son who serves him.
18 Then once more you shall see the distinction
between the righteous and the wicked,
between one who serves God
and one who does not serve Him.”




Chapter 4


1 For behold, the day is coming, burning like an oven,
when all the arrogant and all evildoers will be stubble.
The day that is coming shall set them ablaze,
says the LORD of hosts,
so that it will leave them neither root nor branch.
2 But for you who fear My name,
the sun of righteousness shall rise with healing in its wings.
You shall go out leaping like calves from the stall.
3 And you shall tread down the wicked,
for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet
on the day when I act,
says the LORD of hosts.


4 Remember the law of My servant Moses,
the statutes and judgments that I commanded him at Horeb
for all Israel.
5 Behold, I am sending you Elijah the prophet
before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes.
6 And he will turn the hearts of the fathers to the sons,
and the hearts of the sons to their fathers,
lest I come and strike the land
with a decree of utter destruction.