The Gospel of Matthew


Chapter 1


1 The record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham:
2 Abraham fathered Isaac, and Isaac fathered Jacob, and Jacob fathered Judah and his brothers,
3 and Judah fathered Perez and Zerah by Tamar, and Perez fathered Hezron, and Hezron fathered Ram,
4 and Ram fathered Amminadab, and Amminadab fathered Nahshon, and Nahshon fathered Salmon,
5 and Salmon fathered Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz fathered Obed by Ruth, and Obed fathered Jesse,
6 and Jesse fathered David the king. And David fathered Solomon by the wife of Uriah,
7 and Solomon fathered Rehoboam, and Rehoboam fathered Abijah, and Abijah fathered Asa,
8 and Asa fathered Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat fathered Joram, and Joram fathered Uzziah,
9 and Uzziah fathered Jotham, and Jotham fathered Ahaz, and Ahaz fathered Hezekiah,
10 and Hezekiah fathered Manasseh, and Manasseh fathered Amon, and Amon fathered Josiah,
11 and Josiah fathered Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon.
12 And after the exile to Babylon, Jeconiah fathered Shealtiel, and Shealtiel fathered Zerubbabel,
13 and Zerubbabel fathered Abiud, and Abiud fathered Eliakim, and Eliakim fathered Azor,
14 and Azor fathered Zadok, and Zadok fathered Achim, and Achim fathered Eliud,
15 and Eliud fathered Eleazar, and Eleazar fathered Matthan, and Matthan fathered Jacob,
16 and Jacob fathered Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
17 Thus, all the generations from Abraham to David were fourteen generations, and from David to the exile to Babylon were fourteen generations, and from the exile to Babylon to the Christ were fourteen generations.


18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ took place in this way: When his mother Mary had been betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, she was found to be pregnant by the Holy Spirit.
19 And Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man and not wanting to disgrace her publicly, intended to divorce her quietly.
20 But as he was considering these thingsit happened that an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife, for what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
21 She will give birth to a son, and you shall name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.”
22 All this happened to fulfill what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet:
23 “Behold, the virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and they will call his name Immanuel,” which translated means “God with us.”
24 When Joseph awoke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him and took his wife,
25 but he did not know her intimately until she gave birth to a son. And he named him Jesus.




Chapter 2


1 Now after Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea during the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east arrived in Jerusalem,
2 saying, “Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east and have come to worship him.”
3 When Herod the king heard this, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
4 And gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired from them where the Christ was to be born.
5 They said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for so it has been written by the prophet:
6 ‘And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah, are by no means least among the rulers of Judah; for from you will come a ruler who will shepherd my people Israel.’”
7 Then Herod secretly summoned the wise men and determined from them the exact time the star appeared.
8 And sending them to Bethlehem, he said, “Go and search diligently for the child, and when you find him, report back to me so that I too may go and worship him.”
9 After hearing the king, they departed, and behold, the star that they had seen in the east went before them until it came and stood over the place where the child was.
10 When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
11 And entering the house, they saw the child with Mary, his mother, and falling down, they worshiped him. Then, opening their treasures, they offered him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
12 And being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed for their own country by another route.
13 Now after they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod is about to search for the child to destroy him.”
14 So he got up, took the child and his mother by night, and departed for Egypt,
15 and he remained there until the death of Herod, so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled, saying, “Out of Egypt I called my son.”
16 Then Herod, seeing that he had been deceived by the wise men, became furiously angry, and he sent out orders and put to death all the male children in Bethlehem and in all its surrounding regions who were two years old and under, according to the time he had determined from the wise men.
17 Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,
18 “A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and loud mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and she refused to be comforted, because they are no more.”
19 But when Herod died, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt,
20 saying, “Get up, take the child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the child’s life are dead.”
21 So he got up, took the child and his mother, and went into the land of Israel.
22 But hearing that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And being warned in a dream, he withdrew to the region of Galilee,
23 and he came and settled in a town called Nazareth, so that what was spoken through the prophets might be fulfilled, that he would be called a Nazarene.




Chapter 3


1 In those days, John the Baptist appeared, preaching in the wilderness of Judea,
2 saying, “Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven has come!”
3 This is the one spoken of through Isaiah the prophet: “A voice of one crying out in the wilderness, ‘Prepare the way of the Lord; make his paths straight.’”
4 Now John himself wore clothing made of camel’s hair with a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
5 Then Jerusalem, all Judea, and the whole region around the Jordan went out to him,
6 and they were baptized by him in the Jordan River, confessing their sins.


7 But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his baptism, he said to them, “You offspring of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
8 Produce fruit worthy of repentance,
9 and do not presume to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father,’ for I tell you that God is able to raise up children for Abraham from these stones.
10 Even now the axe is laid at the root of the trees; therefore, every tree that does not produce good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.


11 I baptize you with water for repentance, but the one coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
12 His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly clean his threshing floor and gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”


13 Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
14 But John tried to prevent him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and yet you come to me?”
15 Jesus answered and said to him, “Permit it now, for in this way it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness.” Then he allowed him.
16 After Jesus was baptized, he immediately went up from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming upon him.
17 And behold, a voice from the heavens said, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.”




Chapter 4


1 Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
2 And after fasting forty days and forty nights, he was hungry.
3 And the tempter came and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command these stones to become loaves of bread.”
4 But he answered and said, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of God.’”


5 Then the devil took him to the holy city and set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
6 and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, ‘He will command his angels concerning you,’ and, ‘On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.’”
7 Jesus said to him, “Again it is written, ‘You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’”


8 Again, the devil took him to a very high mountain and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory,
9 and he said to him, “All these I will give you, if you will fall down and worship me.”
10 Then Jesus said to him, “Be gone, Satan! For it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.’”
11 Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and were ministering to him.


12 Now when he heard that John had been arrested, he withdrew into Galilee.
13 And leaving Nazareth, he went and lived in Capernaum by the sea, in the territory of Zebulun and Naphtali,
14 so that what was spoken by the prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled:
15 “The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles—
16 the people dwelling in darkness have seen a great light, and for those dwelling in the region and the shadow of death, on them a light has dawned.”


17 From that time Jesus began to preach, saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”


18 While walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon (who is called Peter) and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
19 And he said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.”
20 Immediately they left their nets and followed him.
21 And going on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets, and he called them.
22 Immediately they left the boat and their father and followed him.


23 And he went throughout all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom and healing every disease and every affliction among the people.
24 So his fame spread throughout all Syria, and they brought him all the sick, those afflicted with various diseases and pains, those oppressed by demons, those having seizures, and paralytics, and he healed them.
25 And great crowds followed him from Galilee and the Decapolis, and from Jerusalem and Judea, and from beyond the Jordan.




Chapter 5


1 When Jesus saw the crowds, he went up on the mountain, sat down, and his disciples came to him.
2 Then he began to teach them, saying:


3 “Blessed are those who know they’re spiritually bankrupt, because the kingdom of heaven belongs to them.
4 Blessed are those who mourn, because they’ll be comforted.
5 Blessed are the humble, because they’ll inherit the earth.
6 Blessed are those who crave righteousness like they’re starving for it, because they’ll be satisfied.
7 Blessed are the merciful, because they’ll receive mercy.
8 Blessed are those with pure hearts, because they’ll see God.
9 Blessed are the peacemakers, because they’ll be called God’s children.
10 Blessed are those who are persecuted for doing what’s right, because the kingdom of heaven is theirs.
11 Blessed are you when people insult you, persecute you, and spread vicious lies about you because of me.
12 Celebrate and be glad, because your reward in heaven is huge—after all, they persecuted the prophets before you the same way.”


13 “You are the salt of the earth. But if salt loses its flavor, how can it be made salty again? It’s useless—only good for being thrown out and trampled underfoot.
14 You are the light of the world. A city on a hill can’t be hidden.
15 Nobody lights a lamp and sticks it under a basket; they put it on a stand so it lights up the whole room.
16 In the same way, let your light shine in front of everyone, so they can see the good you do and give praise to your Father in heaven.”


17 “Do not think that I came to annul the Law or the Prophets—I didn’t come to set them aside but to reveal their true meaning.
18 I’m telling you the truth: until heaven and earth disappear, not a single dot or stroke of the Law will vanish until everything has been accomplished.
19 So, whoever ignores even the smallest commandment and teaches others to do the same will be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. But whoever follows them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven.
20 Let me put it this way: unless your righteousness goes way beyond that of the religious scholars and Pharisees, you won’t even get into the kingdom of heaven.”


21 “You’ve heard it said to people back in the day, ‘Don’t murder,’ and ‘Whoever murders will face judgment.’
22 But I’m telling you, anyone who’s angry with their brother or sister will face judgment too. If you call someone an idiot, you’re in danger of judgment; if you curse them as worthless, you’re risking the fires of hell.
23 So, if you’re offering your gift at the altar and suddenly remember your brother or sister has something against you,
24 leave your gift there in front of the altar. Go, make things right with them first, then come back and offer your gift.
25 Settle things quickly with your accuser while you’re still on the way to court, or they might hand you over to the judge, the judge to the guard, and you’ll end up in prison.
26 I’m telling you, you won’t get out until you’ve paid every last penny.”


27 “You’ve heard it said, ‘Don’t commit adultery.’
28 But I’m telling you, anyone who looks at someone with lust has already committed adultery with them in their heart.
29 If your right eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away—it’s better to lose one part of your body than for your corpse to be thrown undamaged into hell.
30 And if your right hand leads you into sin, cut it off and toss it—better to lose a piece of yourself than for your corpse to go undamaged into hell.”


31 “It was also said, ‘Whoever divorces his wife should give her a certificate of divorce.’
32 But I’m telling you, anyone who divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, makes her commit adultery, and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery too.”


33 “You’ve also heard it said to people long ago, ‘Don’t break your oaths, but keep the promises you make to the Lord.’
34 But I’m telling you, don’t swear oaths at all—not by heaven, because it’s God’s throne;
35 not by the earth, because it’s his footstool; not by Jerusalem, because it’s the city of the great King.
36 Don’t even swear by your own head, because you can’t make a single hair white or black.
37 Just let your ‘yes’ mean yes and your ‘no’ mean no—anything more than that comes from sinfulness.”


38 “You’ve heard it said, ‘An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.’
39 But I’m telling you, don’t resist an evil person. If someone slaps you on the right cheek, turn and offer the other one too.
40 If someone sues you for your shirt, give them your coat as well.
41 If someone forces you to go one mile, go two miles with them.
42 Give to the person who asks you, and don’t turn away someone who wants to borrow from you.”


43 “You’ve heard it said, ‘Love your neighbor and hate your enemy.’
44 But I’m telling you, love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you,
45 so you can be children of your Father in heaven. He makes the sun rise on the evil and the good alike and sends rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
46 If you only love those who love you, what reward do you get? Don’t even tax collectors do that?
47 And if you only greet your own people, what’s so special about that? Don’t even pagans do the same?
48 So be even-handed, just like your Father in heaven is even-handed.”




Chapter 6


1 "Be careful not to practice your righteousness in front of others to be seen by them. If you do, you will have no reward from your Father in heaven.
2 So when you give to the needy, don’t announce it with trumpets like the hypocrites do in the synagogues and on the streets to be praised by people. Truly, I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
3 But when you give to the needy, don’t let your left hand know what your right hand is doing,
4 so that your giving may be in secret. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.


5 And when you pray, don’t be like the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and on the street corners to be seen by others. Truly, I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
6 But when you pray, go into your room, close the door, and pray to your Father who is unseen. Then your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.
7 And when you pray, don’t keep babbling like the pagans, for they think they’ll be heard because of their many words.
8 Don’t be like them, because your Father knows what you need before you ask him.


9 This, then, is how you should pray: ‘Our Father in heaven, may your name be honored as holy,
10 may your kingdom come, may your will be done on earth as it is in heaven.
11 Give us today our daily bread,
12 and forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.
13 And don’t lead us into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.’


14 For if you forgive others their offenses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
15 But if you don’t forgive others, your Father will not forgive your offenses.


16 When you fast, don’t look gloomy like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces to show others they are fasting. Truly, I tell you, they have received their reward in full.
17 But when you fast, put oil on your head and wash your face,
18 so that it won’t be obvious to others that you’re fasting, but only to your Father, who is unseen. And your Father, who sees what is done in secret, will reward you.


19 Don’t store up treasures for yourselves on earth, where moths and rust destroy, and where thieves break in and steal.
20 Instead, store up treasures for yourselves in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys, and where thieves don’t break in and steal.
21 For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.


22 The eye is the lamp of the body. If your eyes are healthy, your whole body will be full of light.
23 But if your eyes are unhealthy, your whole body will be full of darkness. If, then, the light within you is darkness, that darkness is great indeed!


24 No one can serve two masters. Either you will hate the one and love the other, or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve both God and money.


25 Therefore, I tell you, don’t worry about your life—what you will eat or drink—or about your body, or what you will wear. Isn’t life more than food, and the body more than clothes?
26 Look at the birds of the air: they don’t sow or reap or store away in barns, and yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren’t you much more valuable than they are?
27 Can any one of you, by worrying, add a single hour to your life?


28 And why do you worry about clothes? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they don’t labor or spin.
29 Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these.
30 If that’s how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, won’t he much more clothe you—you of little faith?


31 So don’t worry, saying, ‘What will we eat?’ or ‘What will we drink?’ or ‘What will we wear?’
32 For the pagans run after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them.
33 But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well.
34 Therefore, don’t worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own."




Chapter 7


1 "Don’t judge others, so that you won’t be judged.
2 For the way you judge others is how you’ll be judged, and the standard you use to measure them will be used to measure you.
3 Why do you focus on the speck in your brother’s eye but ignore the plank in your own eye?
4 How can you say to your brother, ‘Let me take that speck out of your eye,’ when there’s a plank in your own eye?
5 You hypocrite! First, take the plank out of your own eye, and then you’ll see clearly to remove the speck from your brother’s eye.
6 Don’t give what is holy to dogs, and don’t throw your pearls in front of pigs, or they’ll trample them underfoot and turn around to attack you."


7 "Keep asking, and it will be given to you; keep seeking, and you’ll find; keep knocking, and the door will be opened to you.
8 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
9 Which one of you, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone?
10 Or if he asks for a fish, will you give him a snake?
11 If you, then, even though you’re flawed, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in heaven give good things to those who ask Him?"


12 "So, in everything, treat others the way you want them to treat you, because this sums up the Law and the Prophets."


13 "Enter through the narrow gate. For the gate is wide and the road is spacious that leads to destruction, and many people go through it.
14 But the gate is narrow and the road is tight that leads to life, and only a few find it."


15 "Watch out for false prophets who come to you dressed as sheep but inside are vicious wolves.
16 You’ll recognize them by their actions. Do people pick grapes from thorn bushes or figs from thistles?
17 In the same way, every good tree produces good fruit, but a rotten tree produces bad fruit.
18 A good tree can’t produce bad fruit, nor can a rotten tree produce good fruit.
19 Every tree that doesn’t produce good fruit gets cut down and thrown into the fire.
20 So, you’ll know people by their fruit."


21 "Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven.
22 On that day, many will say to me, ‘Lord, Lord, didn’t we prophesy in your name, drive out demons in your name, and do lots of miracles in your name?’
23 Then I’ll tell them plainly, ‘I never knew you. Get away from me, you who practice disobedience to the law.’"


24 "So, everyone who hears these words of mine and puts them into practice is like a wise man who built his house on the rock.
25 The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, but it didn’t collapse because its foundation was on the rock.
26 But everyone who hears these words of mine and doesn’t put them into practice is like a foolish man who built his house on sand.
27 The rain fell, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat against that house, and it collapsed—and its fall was devastating."


28 When Jesus finished saying these things, the crowds were amazed at his teaching,
29 because he taught them with authority, not like their scribes.




Chapter 8


1 When Jesus came down from the mountain, large crowds followed him.
2 Suddenly, a man with leprosy approached, knelt before him, and said, "Lord, if you’re willing, you can make me clean."
3 Jesus reached out his hand, touched him, and said, "I am willing; be clean." Immediately, his leprosy was cured.
4 Then Jesus said to him, "Make sure you don’t tell anyone about this. Instead, go show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifice Moses commanded, as a testimony to them."


5 As Jesus entered Capernaum, a centurion came to him, pleading,
6 "Lord, my servant is lying at home paralyzed, suffering terribly."
7 Jesus responded, "I will come and heal him."
8 But the centurion replied, "Lord, I’m not worthy to have you come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant will be healed.
9 For I too am a man under authority, with soldiers under me. I tell one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it."
10 When Jesus heard this, he was amazed and said to those following him, "Truly, I tell you, I haven’t found faith this great anywhere in Israel.
11 I say to you, many will come from east and west and recline at the table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven,
12 but the sons of the kingdom will be thrown into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth."
13 Then Jesus said to the centurion, "Go; let it be done for you as you have believed." And at that very moment, his servant was healed.


14 When Jesus arrived at Peter’s house, he saw Peter’s mother-in-law lying in bed with a fever.
15 He touched her hand, and the fever left her. She got up and began to serve him.
16 That evening, people brought to him many who were demon-possessed. He drove out the spirits with a word and healed all who were sick,
17 fulfilling what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: "He took our infirmities and carried our diseases."


18 Now when Jesus saw a crowd around him, he gave orders to cross to the other side of the lake.
19 A scribe approached and said to him, "Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."
20 Jesus replied, "Foxes have dens, and birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head."
21 Another of his disciples said, "Lord, let me first go and bury my father."
22 But Jesus told him, "Follow me, and let the dead bury their own dead."


23 Then he got into the boat, and his disciples followed him.
24 Suddenly, a fierce storm hit the lake, so severe that the waves were crashing over the boat. But Jesus was asleep.
25 The disciples went to him and woke him, shouting, "Lord, save us! We’re going to die!"
26 He said to them, "Why are you afraid, you of little faith?" Then he stood up, rebuked the winds and the sea, and there was a great calm.
27 The men were astonished and said, "What kind of man is this? Even the winds and the sea obey him!"


28 When he arrived at the other side in the region of the Gadarenes, two demon-possessed men met him, coming out of the tombs. They were so violent that no one could pass that way.
29 They shouted, "What do you want with us, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the appointed time?"
30 Now a large herd of pigs was feeding at some distance from them.
31 The demons begged him, "If you drive us out, send us into the herd of pigs."
32 He said to them, "Go." So they came out and went into the pigs, and the whole herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and drowned in the water.
33 The herdsmen fled, went into the town, and reported everything, including what had happened to the demon-possessed men.
34 Then the whole town came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they begged him to leave their region.




Chapter 9


1 Jesus stepped into a boat, crossed over, and came to his own town.
2 Some people brought to him a paralyzed man lying on a mat. When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralyzed man, “Take courage, son; your sins are forgiven.”
3 At this, some of the religious teachers said to themselves, “This man is blaspheming!”
4 Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said, “Why are you thinking evil things in your hearts?
5 Which is easier: to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven,’ or to say, ‘Get up and walk’?
6 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” then he said to the paralyzed man, “Get up, take your mat, and go home.”
7 And the man got up and went home.
8 When the crowd saw this, they were filled with awe and praised God, who had given such authority to human beings.


9 As Jesus went on from there, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax collector’s booth. “Follow me,” he said to him, and Matthew got up and followed him.
10 While Jesus was having dinner at Matthew’s house, many tax collectors and sinners came and ate with him and his disciples.
11 When the Pharisees saw this, they asked his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
12 On hearing this, Jesus said, “It’s not the healthy who need a doctor, but the sick.
13 Go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice.’ For I haven’t come to call the righteous, but sinners.”


14 Then John’s disciples came to him and asked, “Why is it that we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don’t fast?”
15 Jesus answered, “Can the wedding guests mourn while the bridegroom is with them? The time will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast.
16 No one puts a patch of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, because the patch will pull away from the garment, making the tear worse.
17 Nor do people pour new wine into old wineskins. If they do, the skins will burst, the wine will spill, and the wineskins will be ruined. No, they pour new wine into new wineskins, and both are preserved.”


18 While he was saying these things to them, a synagogue leader came and knelt before him, saying, “My daughter has just died, but come and place your hand on her, and she will live.”
19 Jesus got up and followed him, along with his disciples.
20 Just then, a woman who had been suffering from bleeding for twelve years came up behind him and touched the edge of his cloak.
21 She said to herself, “If I only touch his cloak, I’ll be healed.”
22 Jesus turned, saw her, and said, “Take courage, daughter; your faith has healed you.” And from that moment, the woman was healed.


23 When Jesus entered the synagogue leader’s house and saw the flute players and the noisy crowd,
24 he said, “Go away. The girl isn’t dead but asleep.” And they laughed at him.
25 After the crowd had been put outside, he went in, took her by the hand, and the girl got up.
26 News of this spread throughout that region.


27 As Jesus went on from there, two blind men followed him, shouting, “Have mercy on us, Son of David!”
28 When he entered the house, the blind men came to him, and Jesus asked them, “Do you believe that I’m able to do this?” “Yes, Lord,” they replied.
29 Then he touched their eyes and said, “According to your faith, let it be done for you.”
30 And their sight was restored. Jesus warned them sternly, “See that no one knows about this.” 
31 But they went out and spread the news about him all over that region.


32 As they were leaving, a demon-possessed man who couldn’t speak was brought to Jesus.
33 After the demon was driven out, the man spoke. The crowd was amazed and said, “Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel.”
34 But the Pharisees said, “He drives out demons by the prince of demons.”


35 Jesus went through all the towns and villages, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness.
36 When he saw the crowds, he had compassion on them because they were harassed and helpless, like sheep without a shepherd.
37 Then he said to his disciples, “The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few.
38 Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.”




Chapter 10


1 Jesus called his twelve disciples to him and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every kind of disease and sickness.
2 Now these are the names of the twelve apostles: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother;
3 Philip and Bartholomew; Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus;
4 Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, the one who later betrayed him.


5 These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them, “Do not go among the Gentiles or enter any Samaritan town,
6 but go instead to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
7 As you go, proclaim this message: ‘The kingdom of heaven has come near.’
8 Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse those with skin diseases, drive out demons. Freely you have received; freely give.
9 Do not take along gold, silver, or copper coins in your belts,
10 no bag for the journey, or an extra shirt, or sandals, or a staff—for the worker deserves his food.
11 Whenever you enter a town or village, find out who is worthy there and stay with them until you leave.
12 As you enter the house, greet it with peace.
13 If the house is worthy, let your peace rest on it; but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
14 And if anyone does not welcome you or listen to your words, shake the dust off your feet as you leave that house or town.
15 Truly I tell you, it will be more bearable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah on the day of judgment than for that town.”


16 “Look, I am sending you out like sheep among wolves. So be as shrewd as snakes and as innocent as doves.
17 Be on guard against people, for they will hand you over to local councils and flog you in their synagogues.
18 You will be brought before governors and kings because of me, as a testimony to them and to the Gentiles.
19 But when they hand you over, don’t worry about how to speak or what to say. In that moment, what you should say will be given to you,
20 for it won’t be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you.”


21 “Brother will betray brother to death, and a father his child; children will rise up against parents and have them put to death.
22 You will be hated by everyone because of my name, but the one who stands firm to the end will be saved.
23 When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next. Truly I tell you, you will not finish going through the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes.”


24 “A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his master.
25 It is enough for the disciple to be like his teacher, and the servant like his master. If they called the head of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign those of his household!”


26 “So don’t be afraid of them. Nothing is covered up that won’t be revealed, or hidden that won’t be made known.
27 What I tell you in the dark, speak in the light; what you hear whispered, proclaim from the rooftops.
28 Don’t fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the mind. Rather, fear the one who can destroy both mind and body in hell.
29 Aren’t two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them falls to the ground apart from your Father’s knowledge.
30 Even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
31 So don’t be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.”


32 “Everyone who acknowledges me before others, I will also acknowledge before my Father in heaven.
33 But whoever denies me before others, I will also deny before my Father in heaven.”


34 “Don’t think I came to bring peace to the earth. I didn’t come to bring peace, but a sword.
35 For I came to set a man against his father, a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
36 A person’s enemies will be members of their own household.
37 Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me, and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.
38 And whoever does not take up their cross and follow me is not worthy of me.
39 Whoever finds their life will lose it, and whoever loses their life for my sake will find it.”


40 “Whoever welcomes you, welcomes me, and whoever welcomes me, welcomes the one who sent me.
41 Whoever welcomes a prophet because he is a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward, and whoever welcomes a righteous person because he is righteous will receive a righteous person’s reward.
42 And whoever gives even a cup of cold water to one of these little ones because he is my disciple—truly I tell you, that person will certainly not lose their reward.”




Chapter 11


1 After Jesus finished instructing his twelve disciples, he left that place to teach and preach in the towns of the region.


2 Now, when John, who was in prison, heard about the works of the Messiah, he sent his disciples
3 to ask Jesus, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we expect someone else?”
4 Jesus replied, “Go back and report to John what you hear and see:
5 The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, those with skin diseases are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news preached to them.
6 And blessed is anyone who does not stumble because of me.”


7 As John’s disciples were leaving, Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed swayed by the wind?
8 No? Then what did you go out to see? A man dressed in fine clothes? Look, those who wear fine clothes are in kings’ palaces.
9 So what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
10 This is the one about whom it is written: ‘Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you.’
11 Truly I tell you, among those born of women, no one greater than John the Baptist has arisen. Yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.
12 From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of heaven has been forcefully advancing, and forceful people are seizing it.
13 For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John.
14 And if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah, the one who was to come.
15 Whoever has ears, let them hear.


16 “To what can I compare this generation? It’s like children sitting in the marketplaces, calling out to their friends,
17 ‘We played the flute for you, and you didn’t dance; we sang a dirge, and you didn’t mourn.’
18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’
19 The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.’ Yet wisdom is proven right by her actions.”


20 Then Jesus began to denounce the towns where most of his mighty works had been done, because they did not repent.
21 “Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! If the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
22 But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
23 And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted up to heaven? No, you will go down to Hades. For if the mighty works done in you had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day.
24 But I tell you, it will be more bearable for the land of Sodom on the day of judgment than for you.”


25 At that time, Jesus said, “I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned and revealed them to little children.
26 Yes, Father, for this was your good pleasure.
27 All things have been handed over to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him.


28 “Come to me, all you who are weary and burdened, and I will give you rest.
29 Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls.
30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”




Chapter 12


1 At that time, Jesus was walking through the grainfields on the Sabbath. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and eat them.
2 When the Pharisees saw this, they said to him, “Look, your disciples are doing what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.”
3 But he replied to them, “Haven’t you read what David did when he and those with him were hungry?
4 How he entered the house of God and ate the bread of the Presence, which was not lawful for him or his companions to eat, but only for the priests?
5 Or haven’t you read in the Law that on the Sabbath the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and yet are guiltless?
6 I tell you, something greater than the temple is here.
7 If you had understood what this means, ‘I desire mercy and not sacrifice,’ you would not have condemned the innocent.
8 For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”


9 Moving on from there, he entered their synagogue.
10 There was a man with a withered hand, and they asked him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?”—intending to accuse him.
11 He said to them, “Which one of you, if you had a sheep that fell into a pit on the Sabbath, would not grab it and lift it out?
12 How much more valuable is a person than a sheep! So it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath.”
13 Then he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” He stretched it out, and it was restored, as healthy as the other.
14 But the Pharisees went out and plotted against him, how they might destroy him.


15 Aware of this, Jesus withdrew from there. Many followed him, and he healed them all,
16 ordering them not to make him known.
17 This fulfilled what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah:
18 “Here is my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul delights. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he will proclaim justice to the nations.
19 He will not quarrel or cry out, nor will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
20 A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not extinguish, until he brings justice to victory.
21 And in his name the nations will hope.”


22 Then a demon-possessed man who was blind and mute was brought to him, and he healed him, so that the man spoke and saw.
23 All the crowds were amazed and said, “Could this be the Son of David?”
24 But when the Pharisees heard this, they said, “This man only casts out demons by Beelzebul, the ruler of the demons.”
25 Knowing their thoughts, he said to them, “Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and no city or house divided against itself will stand.
26 If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself—how then will his kingdom stand?
27 And if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your own people cast them out? Therefore, they will be your judges.
28 But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
29 Or how can someone enter a strong man’s house and plunder his goods unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can plunder his house.
30 Whoever is not with me is against me, and whoever does not gather with me scatters.
31 Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven people, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven.
32 Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come.”


33 “Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree bad and its fruit bad, for a tree is known by its fruit.
34 You brood of vipers! How can you speak good things when you are evil? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
35 The good person brings good things out of a good treasure, and the evil person brings evil things out of an evil treasure.
36 I tell you, on the day of judgment people will give an account for every careless word they speak. 37 For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”


38 Then some of the scribes and Pharisees responded, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.”
39 But he answered them, “An evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah.
40 For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so the Son of Man will be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
41 The people of Nineveh will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because they repented at Jonah’s preaching, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here.
42 The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.”


43 “When an unclean spirit leaves a person, it goes through waterless places seeking rest but does not find it.
44 Then it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’ And when it arrives, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order.
45 Then it goes and brings with it other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and the last state of that person becomes worse than the first. So it will be with this evil generation.”


46 While he was still speaking to the crowds, his mother and brothers stood outside, wanting to speak to him.
47 Someone told him, “Look, your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to speak to you.”
48 But he replied to the one who told him, “Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?”
49 And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he said, “Here are my mother and my brothers!
50 For Whoever does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother and sister and mother.”




Chapter 13


1 On that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat by the sea.
2 Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat down, while the whole crowd stood on the shore.
3 He spoke to them at length in parables, saying, “Listen, a farmer went out to sow seed.
4 As he was sowing, some seeds fell along the path, and the birds came and ate them up.
5 Other seeds fell on rocky ground where they didn’t have much soil. They sprang up quickly because the soil wasn’t deep,
6 but when the sun came up, they were scorched, and since they had no root, they withered away.
7 Other seeds fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
8 Still other seeds fell on good soil and produced a crop—some a hundred times what was sown, some sixty, and some thirty.
9 Anyone who has ears should listen.”


10 Then the disciples came to him and asked, “Why do you speak to them in parables?”
11 He answered them, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it has not been given.
12 For whoever has, more will be given, and they will have an abundance; but whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken away.
13 This is why I speak to them in parables: because seeing, they do not see, and hearing, they do not hear, nor do they understand.
14 In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, which says, ‘You will listen and listen but never understand; you will look and look but never perceive.
15 For this people’s heart has grown dull, their ears are hard of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and turn back, and I would heal them.’
16 But blessed are your eyes because they see, and your ears because they hear.
17 Truly I tell you, many prophets and righteous people longed to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.”


18 “So listen to the parable of the sower.
19 When anyone hears the word of the kingdom and doesn’t understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away what was sown in their heart. This is the seed sown along the path.
20 The seed sown on rocky ground is the one who hears the word and immediately receives it with joy,
21 but they have no root in themselves and only last for a short time. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, they quickly fall away.
22 The seed sown among the thorns is the one who hears the word, but the worries of this world and the deceitfulness of wealth choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
23 But the seed sown on good soil is the one who hears the word and understands it, who indeed bears fruit and produces—some a hundred times, some sixty, some thirty.”


24 He presented another parable to them, saying, “The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field.
25 But while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed weeds among the wheat and then went away.
26 When the wheat sprouted and produced grain, the weeds also appeared.
27 The servants of the landowner came and said to him, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Where did these weeds come from?’
28 He replied, ‘An enemy did this.’ The servants asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and pull them up?’
29 But he said, ‘No, because while you’re pulling up the weeds, you might uproot the wheat along with them.
30 Let both grow together until the harvest. At harvest time, I’ll tell the reapers, “First gather the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned, then gather the wheat into my barn.”’”


31 He offered them another parable, saying, “The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed that a man took and sowed in his field.
32 It’s the smallest of all seeds, but when it grows, it becomes larger than the garden plants and turns into a tree, so that the birds of the air come and nest in its branches.”


33 He told them another parable: “The kingdom of heaven is like yeast that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour until it was all leavened.”


34 Jesus spoke all these things to the crowds in parables; he didn’t speak to them without a parable,
35 so that what was spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled: “I will open my mouth in parables; I will declare things hidden since the foundation of the world.”


36 Then he left the crowds and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field.”
37 He answered, “The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man.
38 The field is the world, and the good seed represents the children of the kingdom. The weeds are the children of the evil one,
39 and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
40 Just as the weeds are gathered and burned in the fire, so it will be at the end of the age.
41 The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all causes of sin and all lawbreakers,
42 and they will throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
43 Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. Anyone who has ears should listen.”


44 “The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure hidden in a field, which a man found and covered up again. Then in his joy, he goes and sells everything he has and buys that field.”


45 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant searching for fine pearls.
46 When he found one pearl of great value, he went and sold everything he had and bought it.”


47 “Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net thrown into the sea that caught fish of every kind.
48 When it was full, they pulled it ashore, sat down, and sorted the good fish into containers but threw the bad ones away.
49 That’s how it will be at the end of the age: the angels will come and separate the evil from the righteous
50 and throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”


51 “Have you understood all these things?” he asked them. They said, “Yes.”
52 Then he said to them, “Therefore every scribe trained for the kingdom of heaven is like a homeowner who brings out of his storeroom new things and old.”


53 When Jesus had finished these parables, he left that place.
54 He came to his hometown and began teaching them in their synagogue, so that they were amazed and said, “Where did this man get this wisdom and these miracles?
55 Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother named Mary, and his brothers James, Joseph, Simon, and Judas?
56 And his sisters, aren’t they all with us? So where did he get all these things?”
57 And they took offense at him. But Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honor except in his hometown and in his own household.”
58 And he didn’t do many miracles there because of their unbelief.




Chapter 14


1 At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the news about Jesus.
2 He said to his servants, "This is John the Baptist! He’s been raised from the dead, and that’s why these miraculous powers are at work in him."
3 For Herod had seized John, bound him, and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife.
4 John had been telling him, "It’s not lawful for you to have her."
5 Although Herod wanted to kill John, he was afraid of the crowd, because they regarded him as a prophet. 


6 But when Herod’s birthday celebration came, the daughter of Herodias danced before everyone and pleased Herod.
7 So he promised with an oath to give her whatever she asked for.
8 Prompted by her mother, she said, "Give me the head of John the Baptist here on a platter."
9 The king was distressed, but because of his oaths and the guests, he ordered it to be given to her.
10 He sent word and had John beheaded in the prison.
11 John’s head was brought on a platter and given to the girl, who then brought it to her mother.
12 John’s disciples came, took the body, and buried it. Then they went and told Jesus.


13 When Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat to a secluded place by himself. But when the crowds heard about it, they followed him on foot from the towns.
14 When he went ashore, he saw a large crowd, and he felt compassion for them and healed their sick.
15 As evening approached, the disciples came to him and said, "This place is remote, and it’s getting late. Send the crowds away so they can go into the villages and buy food for themselves."
16 But Jesus said to them, "They don’t need to go away. You give them something to eat."
17 They replied, "We only have five loaves of bread and two fish here."
18 He said, "Bring them to me."
19 Then he instructed the crowds to sit down on the grass. Taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven, blessed them, broke the loaves, and gave them to the disciples, and the disciples gave them to the crowds.
20 Everyone ate and was satisfied. They picked up twelve baskets full of leftover pieces.
21 Those who ate numbered about five thousand men, not counting women and children.


22 Immediately afterward, Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he dismissed the crowds.
23 After sending them away, he went up on a mountain by himself to pray. When evening came, he was there alone.
24 Meanwhile, the boat was already far from land, battered by the waves, because the wind was against them.
25 During the fourth watch of the night, Jesus came to them, walking on the sea.
26 When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were terrified and said, "It’s a ghost!" And they cried out in fear.
27 But Jesus immediately spoke to them, saying, "Take courage! It’s me. Don’t be afraid." 


28 Peter answered him, "Lord, if it’s you, command me to come to you on the water."
29 Jesus said, "Come." So Peter got out of the boat and walked on the water toward Jesus.
30 But when he saw the strong wind, he became afraid, and as he began to sink, he cried out, "Lord, save me!"
31 Jesus immediately reached out his hand and caught him, saying, "You of little faith, why did you doubt?"
32 When they got into the boat, the wind stopped.
33 Those in the boat worshiped him, saying, "Truly, you are the Son of God."


34 After they crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret.
35 When the men of that place recognized Jesus, they sent word into the surrounding region, and people brought all who were sick to him.
36 They begged him to let them touch even the edge of his cloak, and all who touched it were healed.




Chapter 15


1 Then some Pharisees and scribes from Jerusalem approached Jesus, saying,
2 “Why do your disciples break the tradition of the elders? They don’t wash their hands when they eat bread.”
3 He answered them, “And why do you break God’s commandment for the sake of your tradition?
4 For God said, ‘Honor your father and mother,’ and, ‘Whoever speaks evil of father or mother must be put to death.’
5 But you say, ‘If someone tells their father or mother, “Whatever help you might have received from me is a gift to God,”
6 then they don’t need to honor their parents.’ So, you nullify God’s word for the sake of your tradition.
7 You hypocrites! Isaiah was right when he prophesied about you, saying,
8 ‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me;
9 they worship me in vain, teaching human rules as doctrines.’”


10 Then he called the crowd to him and said, “Listen and understand:
11 It’s not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person, but what comes out of the mouth—this is what defiles a person.”
12 Then the disciples came to him and said, “Did you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this?”
13 He replied, “Every plant that my heavenly Father didn’t plant will be uprooted.
14 Leave them alone; they’re blind guides. If a blind person leads another blind person, both will fall into a pit.”
15 Peter responded, “Explain this parable to us.”
16 Jesus said, “Are you still so slow to understand?
17 Don’t you see that whatever enters the mouth goes into the stomach and then passes out of the body?
18 But what comes out of the mouth comes from the heart, and that’s what defiles a person.
19 For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false testimony, and slander.
20 These are what defile a person, but eating with unwashed hands doesn’t defile anyone.”


21 Jesus left that place and withdrew to the region of Tyre and Sidon.
22 A Canaanite woman from that area came out and cried, “Have mercy on me, Lord, Son of David! My daughter is severely tormented by a demon.”
23 But he didn’t answer her a word. His disciples came and urged him, saying, “Send her away, because she keeps shouting after us.”
24 He responded, “I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”
25 But she came, knelt before him, and said, “Lord, help me!”
26 He replied, “It’s not right to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs.”
27 She said, “Yes, Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from their masters’ table.”
28 Then Jesus answered her, “Woman, your faith is great! Let it be done for you as you wish.” And her daughter was healed at that very moment.


29 Jesus moved on from there and came near the Sea of Galilee. He went up on a mountain and sat down.
30 Large crowds came to him, bringing the lame, the blind, the crippled, the mute, and many others. They laid them at his feet, and he healed them.
31 The crowd was amazed when they saw the mute speaking, the crippled made whole, the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.


32 Then Jesus called his disciples to him and said, “I have compassion for the crowd because they’ve been with me for three days now and have nothing to eat. I don’t want to send them away hungry, or they might collapse on the way.”
33 The disciples said to him, “Where are we going to get enough bread in this remote place to feed such a large crowd?”
34 Jesus asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They said, “Seven, and a few small fish.”
35 He told the crowd to sit down on the ground.
36 Then he took the seven loaves and the fish, gave thanks, broke them, and gave them to the disciples, who distributed them to the crowd.
37 They all ate and were satisfied. Afterward, they collected seven baskets full of leftover pieces.
38 Those who ate numbered four thousand men, besides women and children.
39 After dismissing the crowd, he got into the boat and went to the region of Magadan.




Chapter 16


1 The Pharisees and Sadducees approached Jesus, and to test him, they asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
2 He responded to them, “When evening comes, you say, ‘It’ll be fair weather, because the sky is red.’
3 And in the morning, you say, ‘It’ll be stormy today, because the sky is red and threatening.’ You know how to interpret the appearance of the sky, but you can’t interpret the signs of the times.
4 An evil and adulterous generation demands a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.” Then he left them and went away.


5 When the disciples crossed to the other side, they forgot to bring bread.
6 Jesus said to them, “Watch out and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
7 They started discussing among themselves, saying, “It’s because we didn’t bring any bread.”
8 Aware of this, Jesus said, “Why are you talking about not having bread, you of little faith?
9 Don’t you understand yet? Don’t you remember the five loaves for the five thousand and how many baskets you collected?
10 Or the seven loaves for the four thousand and how many baskets you gathered?
11 How is it that you don’t realize I wasn’t talking about bread? Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”
12 Then they understood that he wasn’t telling them to beware of the yeast in bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.


13 When Jesus came to the region of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say the Son of Man is?”
14 They replied, “Some say John the Baptist, others say Elijah, and still others say Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
15 He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?”
16 Simon Peter answered, “You are the Messiah, the Son of the living God.”
17 Jesus responded, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah, because flesh and blood didn’t reveal this to you, but my Father in heaven did.
18 And I tell you, you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not overpower it.
19 I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.”
20 Then he instructed his disciples not to tell anyone that he was the Messiah.


21 From that time on, Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and on the third day be raised from the dead.
22 Peter took him aside and started to rebuke him, saying, “Far be it from you, Lord! This will never happen to you.”
23 But Jesus turned and said to Peter, “Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, because you’re not thinking about God’s concerns, but human ones.”


24 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “If anyone wants to follow me, let them deny themselves, take up their cross, and follow me.
25 For whoever wants to save their life will lose it, but whoever loses their life for my sake will find it.
26 What good will it be for someone to gain the whole world but forfeit their eternal salvation? Or what can anyone give in exchange for their salvation?
27 For the Son of Man is going to come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then he will repay each person according to what they have done.
28 Truly I tell you, some who are standing here will not taste death before they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.”




Chapter 17


1 After six days, Jesus took Peter, James, and John, James’s brother, and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
2 There, he was transformed in front of them: his face shone like the sun, and his clothes became as white as light.
3 Suddenly, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with Jesus.
4 Peter spoke up and said to Jesus, “Lord, it’s good that we’re here. If you want, I’ll set up three shelters—one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
5 While he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased. Listen to him.”
6 When the disciples heard this, they fell facedown, overwhelmed with fear.
7 But Jesus came over, touched them, and said, “Get up, and don’t be afraid.”
8 When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus alone.


9 As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus instructed them, “Don’t tell anyone about this vision until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
10 The disciples asked him, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”
11 Jesus answered, “Elijah does come, and he will restore everything.
12 But I tell you, Elijah has already come, and they didn’t recognize him; instead, they did whatever they wanted to him. In the same way, the Son of Man is going to suffer at their hands.”
13 Then the disciples understood that he was talking about John the Baptist.


14 When they reached the crowd, a man approached Jesus, knelt before him,
15 and said, “Lord, have mercy on my son! He has seizures and suffers terribly—he often falls into the fire or into water.
16 I brought him to your disciples, but they couldn’t heal him.”
17 Jesus responded, “You faithless and perverse generation, how long will I have to stay with you? How long will I have to put up with you? Bring him here to me.”
18 Then Jesus rebuked the demon, and it came out of the boy, and he was healed from that moment.


19 Later, the disciples came to Jesus privately and asked, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?”
20 He said to them, “Because of your little faith. Truly, I tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you.”


21 [Omitted. Not in the earliest and most reliable manuscripts.]


22 While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is going to be handed over into the hands of men,
23 and they will kill him, but on the third day he will be raised from the dead.” And they were deeply grieved.


24 When they arrived in Capernaum, the collectors of the two-drachma tax came to Peter and asked, “Doesn’t your teacher pay the tax?”
25 He said, “Yes.” But when he went into the house, Jesus spoke first, saying, “What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth collect tolls or taxes—from their own sons or from others?”
26 Peter answered, “From others.” Jesus said to him, “Then the sons are exempt.
27 But so that we don’t offend them, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take the first fish you catch. When you open its mouth, you’ll find a coin worth four drachmas. Take it and give it to them for me and you.”




Chapter 18


1 At that moment, the disciples approached Jesus and asked, “Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?”
2 He called a child over, placed them in the middle of the group,
3 and said, “I’m telling you the truth: unless you change and become like little children, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.
4 So, whoever humbles themselves like this child—such a one is greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
5 And whoever welcomes one child like this in my name, welcomes me.”


6 “But if anyone causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and be drowned in the depths of the sea.
7 Woe to the world because of the things that cause people to stumble! Such things must happen, but woe to the person through whom they come!
8 If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and throw it away. It’s better for you to enter life maimed or crippled than to have two hands or two feet and be thrown into eternal fire.
9 And if your eye causes you to stumble, gouge it out and throw it away. It’s better for you to enter life with one eye than to have two eyes and be thrown into the fire of hell.”


10 “Make sure you don’t look down on one of these little ones, because I’m telling you that their angels in heaven always see the face of my Father in heaven.
11 [Omitted. Not in the earliest and most reliable manuscripts.]
12 What do you think? If a man has a hundred sheep and one of them wanders off, won’t he leave the ninety-nine on the hills and go search for the one that’s lost?
13 And if he finds it, I assure you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine that didn’t wander off.
14 In the same way, it’s not the will of your Father in heaven that even one of these little ones should perish.”


15 “If your brother or sister sins, go and point out their fault, just between the two of you. If they listen to you, you’ve won them over.
16 But if they don’t listen, take one or two others along with you, so that every matter can be confirmed by the testimony of two or three witnesses.
17 If they still refuse to listen, tell it to the church. And if they won’t listen even to the church, treat them as you would a pagan or a tax collector.
18 I’m telling you the truth: whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven.
19 Again, I assure you that if two of you on earth agree about anything you ask for, it will be done for you by my Father in heaven.
20 For where two or three gather in my name, there I am with them.”


21 Then Peter came up to him and said, “Lord, how many times should I forgive my brother or sister who sins against me? Up to seven times?”
22 Jesus answered, “I tell you: not up to seven times, but up to seventy-seven times.”


23 “Because of this, the kingdom of heaven is like a king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants.
24 As he began the process, a man who owed him ten thousand talents was brought to him.
25 Since he couldn’t pay, the master ordered that he, his wife, his children, and everything he owned would be sold to repay the debt.
26 At this, the servant fell on his knees before him and said, ‘Be patient with me, and I’ll repay you everything.’
27 The master, moved with compassion, released him and forgave the debt.
28 But when that servant left, he found one of his fellow servants who owed him a hundred silver coins. He grabbed him and began choking him, saying, ‘Pay me back what you owe!’
29 His fellow servant fell to his knees and begged, ‘Be patient with me, and I’ll pay you back.’
30 But he refused. Instead, he went off and had the man thrown into prison until he could repay the debt.
31 When the other servants saw what had happened, they were deeply distressed and went to their master to report everything that had taken place.
32 Then the master called the servant in and said, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt because you pleaded with me.
33 Shouldn’t you have had mercy on your fellow servant, just as I had mercy on you?’
34 In anger, his master handed him over to the jailers to be tortured until he could pay back everything he owed.
35 This is how my heavenly Father will treat each of you unless you forgive your brother or sister from your heart.”




Chapter 19


1 When Jesus had finished saying these things, he left Galilee and went into the region of Judea beyond the Jordan.
2 Large crowds followed him, and he healed them there.


3 Some Pharisees came to him, testing him, and asked, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?”
4 He answered them, “Haven’t you read that the one who made them from the beginning ‘made them male and female,’
5 and said, ‘For this reason a man will leave his father and mother and be united to his wife, and the two will become one flesh’?
6 So they are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore, what God has joined together, let no one separate.”
7 They said to him, “Then why did Moses command us to give a certificate of divorce and send her away?”
8 Jesus replied, “Because of the hardness of your hearts, Moses allowed you to divorce your wives. However, it was not this way from the beginning.
9 Instead, I tell you: whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery.”


10 The disciples said to him, “If this is the situation between a husband and wife, it’s better not to marry.”
11 But he said to them, “Not everyone can accept this teaching, but only those to whom it has been given.
12 For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs who were made that way by people, and there are eunuchs who made themselves that way for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Let the one who is able to accept this accept it.”


13 Then little children were brought to him so that he might lay his hands on them and pray. But the disciples rebuked those who brought them.
14 Jesus said, “Let the little children come to me, and don’t stop them, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as these.”
15 And after laying his hands on them, he went on from there.


16 Now a man came up to him and said, “Teacher, what good thing must I do to have eternal life?”
17 Jesus said to him, “Why do you ask me about what is good? There is only one who is good. If you want to enter life, keep the commandments.”
18 He said to him, “Which ones?” And Jesus replied, “You shall not murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall not bear false witness,
19 honor your father and mother, and you shall love your neighbor as yourself.”
20 The young man said to him, “I’ve kept all these. What do I still lack?”
21 Jesus said to him, “If you want to be perfect, go, sell your possessions and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven. Then come, follow me.”
22 But when the young man heard this, he went away sorrowful, for he had many possessions.


23 Then Jesus said to his disciples, “Truly I tell you, it is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven.
24 Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”
25 When the disciples heard this, they were greatly astonished and said, “Then who can be saved?”
26 Jesus looked at them and said, “With people this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”


27 Then Peter responded, “Teacher, we’ve left everything and followed you. What then will there be for us?”
28 Jesus said to them, “Truly I tell you, in the regenesis of all things, when the Son of Man sits on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
29 And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or fields for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and will inherit eternal life.
30 But many who are first will be last, and the last will be first.”




Chapter 20


1 “The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner who went out early in the morning to hire workers for his vineyard.
2 After agreeing with the workers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
3 Around nine o’clock, he went out again and saw others standing in the marketplace doing nothing.
4 He said to them, ‘You go into the vineyard too, and I’ll pay you whatever is fair.’ So they went.
5 He went out again around noon and three o’clock and did the same thing.
6 Then about five o’clock, he went out and found others standing around. He asked them, ‘Why are you standing here all day with nothing to do?’
7 They answered, ‘Because no one hired us.’ He told them, ‘You go into the vineyard too.’


8 When evening came, the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman, ‘Call the workers and pay them their wages, starting with the last ones hired and moving to the first.’
9 The ones who started at five o’clock came forward, and each received a denarius.
10 When the first ones hired came, they thought they’d get more, but they also received a denarius each.
11 After getting paid, they started grumbling against the landowner,
12 saying, ‘These guys who came last only worked one hour, and you made them equal to us who carried the load all day in the scorching heat!’
13 But he replied to one of them, ‘Friend, I’m not being unfair to you. Didn’t you agree to work for a denarius?
14 Take what’s yours and go. I want to give the last workers the same as I gave you.
15 Can’t I do what I want with my own money? Or are you jealous because I’m generous?’
16 So, the last will be first, and the first will be last.”


17 As Jesus was heading up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside privately and said to them on the way,
18 “Look, we’re going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be handed over to the chief priests and scribes. They’ll condemn him to death
19 and turn him over to the Gentiles to be mocked, flogged, and crucified. But on the third day, he’ll be raised.”


20 Then the mother of Zebedee’s sons came to Jesus with her sons, kneeling before him to ask something.
21 He said to her, “What do you want?” She replied, “Promise that these two sons of mine will sit, one at your right and one at your left, in your kingdom.”
22 Jesus answered, “You don’t know what you’re asking. Can you drink the cup I’m about to drink?” They said to him, “We can.”
23 He told them, “You will indeed drink my cup, but sitting at my right or left isn’t mine to grant—it’s for those my Father has prepared it for.”


24 When the other ten disciples heard this, they got upset with the two brothers.
25 But Jesus called them over and said, “You know how the rulers of the Gentiles lord it over people, and their big shots exercise authority over them.
26 It’s not going to be like that with you. Instead, whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant,
27 and whoever wants to be first among you must be your slave—
28 just like the Son of Man didn’t come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.”


29 As they were leaving Jericho, a large crowd followed him.
30 Two blind men were sitting by the road, and when they heard Jesus was passing by, they shouted, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
31 The crowd told them to be quiet, but they shouted even louder, “Lord, have mercy on us, Son of David!”
32 Jesus stopped, called them over, and said, “What do you want me to do for you?”
33 They answered, “Lord, we want our eyes opened.”
34 Moved with compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and right away they could see. Then they followed him.




Chapter 21


1 As they approached Jerusalem and came to Bethphage, on the Mount of Olives, Jesus sent two disciples ahead,
2 saying to them, "Go into the village right in front of you, and immediately you’ll find a donkey tied up with her colt next to her. Untie them and bring them to me.
3 If anyone says anything to you, just say, ‘The Lord needs them,’ and he’ll let them go right away."
4 This happened to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet:
5 "Say to the daughter of Zion, ‘Look, your king is coming to you, humble and riding on a donkey, and on a colt, the foal of a donkey.’"


6 The disciples went and did exactly as Jesus had instructed them.
7 They brought the donkey and the colt, placed their cloaks on them, and Jesus sat on them.
8 A huge crowd spread their cloaks on the road, while others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the path.
9 The crowds walking ahead of him and those following behind were shouting, "Hosanna to the Son of David! Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"


10 When he entered Jerusalem, the whole city was stirred up, asking, "Who is this?"
11 The crowds answered, "This is the prophet Jesus, from Nazareth in Galilee."


12 Jesus went into the temple and drove out all the people buying and selling there. He overturned the tables of the money changers and the seats of those selling doves.
13 He said to them, "It’s written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer,’ but you’ve turned it into a den of robbers."


14 The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
15 But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the amazing things he was doing and heard the children shouting in the temple, "Hosanna to the Son of David," they were furious.
16 They said to him, "Do you hear what these kids are saying?" Jesus replied, "Yes, I do. Haven’t you ever read, ‘Out of the mouths of infants and nursing babies you have prepared praise’?"
17 Then he left them and went out of the city to Bethany, where he spent the night.


18 Early the next morning, as he was heading back to the city, he got hungry.
19 Seeing a fig tree by the road, he went up to it but found nothing on it except leaves. He said to it, "May you never bear fruit again!" And instantly, the fig tree withered.
20 When the disciples saw this, they were amazed and asked, "How did the fig tree wither so fast?"
21 Jesus answered them, "I’m telling you the truth: if you have faith and don’t doubt, you’ll not only do what was done to this fig tree, but you could even say to this mountain, ‘Get up and throw yourself into the sea,’ and it would happen.
22 Whatever you ask for in prayer, if you believe, you’ll receive it."


23 When he entered the temple, the chief priests and elders of the people approached him while he was teaching and said, "By what authority are you doing these things? And who gave you this authority?"
24 Jesus responded, "I’ll ask you one question too. If you answer me, I’ll tell you by what authority I’m doing these things:
25 Where did John’s baptism come from? Was it from heaven or of human origin?" They started discussing it among themselves, saying, "If we say ‘from heaven,’ he’ll ask us, ‘Then why didn’t you believe him?’
26 But if we say ‘of human origin,’ we’re afraid of the crowd, because they all consider John a prophet."
27 So they answered Jesus, "We don’t know." He said to them, "Then I’m not telling you by what authority I’m doing these things either."


28 "What do you think? A man had two sons. He went to the first and said, ‘Son, go work in the vineyard today.’
29 The son replied, ‘I don’t want to,’ but later he changed his mind and went.
30 The father went to the second son and said the same thing. He answered, ‘I’ll go, sir,’ but he didn’t go.
31 Which of the two did what the father wanted?" They said, "The first." Jesus said to them, "I’m telling you the truth: tax collectors and prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you.
32 John came to you with the way of righteousness, and you didn’t believe him, but the tax collectors and prostitutes did. But even after you saw them, you srull didn’t change your minds and believe him."


33 "Listen to another parable: There was a landowner who planted a vineyard, put a fence around it, dug a winepress in it, and built a tower. Then he leased it to tenants and went away on a trip.
34 When harvest time came, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his share of the fruit.
35 But the tenants grabbed his servants; they beat one, killed another, and stoned a third.
36 He sent another group of servants, larger than the first, and they did the same thing to them.
37 Finally, he sent his son to them, thinking, ‘They’ll respect my son.’
38 But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, ‘This is the heir. Come on, let’s kill him and take his inheritance.’
39 So they grabbed him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
40 Now, when the owner of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those tenants?"
41 They answered, "He’ll destroy those wicked men completely and lease the vineyard to other tenants who’ll give him his share of the harvest at the right time."


42 Jesus said to them, "Haven’t you ever read in the Scriptures, ‘The stone the builders rejected has become the cornerstone; this is the Lord’s doing, and it’s incredible in our eyes’?
43 So I’m telling you, the kingdom of God will be taken away from you and given to a people who will produce its fruit.
44 Anyone who falls on this stone will be shattered, and if it falls on anyone, it will crush them."


45 When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they knew he was talking about them.
46 They wanted to arrest him, but they were afraid of the crowds, who regarded him as a prophet.




Chapter 22


1 Jesus spoke to them again in parables, saying,
2 "The kingdom of heaven is like a king who prepared a wedding feast for his son.
3 He sent his servants to call those who had been invited to the wedding, but they didn’t want to come.
4 So he sent other servants, instructing them, ‘Tell those who were invited, “Look, I’ve prepared my dinner—my oxen and fattened cattle have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding feast.”’
5 But they ignored it and went off—one to his farm, another to his business.
6 The rest seized his servants, mistreated them, and killed them.
7 The king was furious. He sent his troops, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.


8 Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding feast is ready, but those who were invited didn’t deserve it.
9 Go out to the street corners and invite anyone you find to the wedding.’
10 So the servants went out into the streets and gathered everyone they could find, both bad and good, and the wedding hall was filled with guests.


11 But when the king came in to see the guests, he noticed a man there who wasn’t wearing wedding clothes.
12 He said to him, ‘Friend, how did you get in here without wedding clothes?’ The man was speechless.
13 Then the king told the attendants, ‘Tie him up hand and foot, and throw him out into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’
14 For many are invited, but few are chosen."


15 Then the Pharisees went and plotted how they could trap Jesus with his own words.
16 They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, "Teacher, we know you’re truthful and teach God’s way honestly. You don’t care about anyone’s opinion or show favoritism.
17 So tell us what you think: Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar or not?"
18 But Jesus, aware of their malice, said, "Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?
19 Show me the coin used for the tax." They brought him a denarius.
20 He asked them, "Whose image and inscription are on it?"
21 They answered, "Caesar’s." Then he said to them, "Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and to God what belongs to God."
22 When they heard this, they were amazed and left him, walking away.


23 That same day, some Sadducees—who say there is no resurrection—came to him and asked,
24 "Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies without children, his brother must marry the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.’
25 Now, there were seven brothers among us. The first one married and died, and since he had no children, he left his wife to his brother.
26 The same thing happened to the second and third, all the way to the seventh.
27 Finally, the woman died too.
28 So, in the resurrection, whose wife will she be out of the seven, since all of them had her?"
29 Jesus answered them, "You’re mistaken because you don’t know the Scriptures or the power of God.
30 In the resurrection, people neither marry nor are given in marriage but are like the angels in heaven.
31 As for the resurrection of the dead, haven’t you read what God said to you:
32 ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’? He isn’t the God of the dead, but of the living."
33 When the crowds heard this, they were astonished at his teaching.


34 When the Pharisees heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, they gathered together.
35 One of them, a lawyer, tested him with a question:
36 "Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the Law?"
37 Jesus replied, "‘Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.’
38 This is the first and greatest commandment.
39 The second is like it: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself.’
40 All the Law and the Prophets depend on these two commandments."


41 While the Pharisees were still gathered, Jesus asked them,
42 "What do you think about the Messiah? Whose son is he?" They said to him, "David’s."
43 He replied, "Then why does David, speaking by the Spirit, call him ‘Lord,’ saying,
44 ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand until I put your enemies under your feet”’?
45 If David calls him ‘Lord,’ how can he be his son?"
46 No one could answer him a word, and from that day on, no one dared to question him anymore.




Chapter 23


1 Then Jesus spoke to the crowds and to his disciples,
2 saying, “The scribes and the Pharisees have taken their seat on the chair of Moses.
3 So, do everything they tell you and follow it, but don’t imitate their actions, because they say things and don’t do them.
4 They tie up heavy burdens and place them on people’s shoulders, but they themselves aren’t willing to lift a finger to move them.
5 Everything they do is for show, to be noticed by others. They make their phylacteries wide and their tassels long,
6 and they love the best seats at banquets and the front rows in the synagogues,
7 along with the greetings in the marketplaces and being called ‘Rabbi’ by people.


8 But you—don’t let yourselves be called ‘Rabbi,’ because you have one Teacher, and you’re all siblings.
9 Don’t call anyone on earth your ‘father,’ because you have one Father, the one in heaven.
10 And don’t be called ‘instructors,’ because you have one Instructor, the Messiah.
11 The greatest among you will be your servant.
12 Whoever exalts themselves will be humbled, and whoever humbles themselves will be exalted.


13 But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You shut the kingdom of heaven in people’s faces. You don’t go in yourselves, and you don’t let those trying to enter do so either.
15 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You travel across sea and land to make one convert, and when they become one, you make them twice as much a child of hell as you are.


16 Woe to you, blind guides! You say, ‘If someone swears by the temple, it’s nothing, but if someone swears by the gold of the temple, they’re bound by it.’
17 You blind fools! Which is greater, the gold or the temple that makes the gold holy?
18 And you say, ‘If someone swears by the altar, it’s nothing, but if someone swears by the gift on it, they’re bound by it.’
19 You blind people! Which is greater, the gift or the altar that makes the gift holy?
20 So, whoever swears by the altar swears by it and everything on it.
21 And whoever swears by the temple swears by it and by the one who dwells in it.
22 And whoever swears by heaven swears by the throne of God and by the one seated on it.


23 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You tithe mint, dill, and cumin, but you’ve neglected the weightier parts of the law: justice, mercy, and faithfulness. These you should’ve done without skipping the others.
24 You blind guides! You strain at a gnat but swallow a camel.


25 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You clean the outside of the cup and dish, but inside they’re full of greed and self-indulgence.
26 Blind Pharisee! First clean the inside of the cup, so the outside can be clean too.


27 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You’re like whitewashed tombs, which look beautiful on the outside but are full of dead people’s bones and all kinds of uncleanness inside.
28 In the same way, you appear righteous to people on the outside, but inside you’re full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.


29 Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! You build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the graves of the righteous,
30 saying, ‘If we’d lived in our ancestors’ days, we wouldn’t have joined them in shedding the prophets’ blood.’
31 So you testify against yourselves that you’re the descendants of those who murdered the prophets.
32 Go ahead and fill up the measure of your ancestors’ guilt.


33 You snakes, you brood of vipers! How will you escape the judgment of hell?
34 Because of this, look, I’m sending you prophets, wise people, and scribes. Some of them you’ll kill and crucify, and some you’ll flog in your synagogues and chase from town to town,
35 so that all the righteous blood shed on earth will come upon you—from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zechariah, son of Barachiah, whom you murdered between the temple and the altar.
36 Truly, I tell you, all these things will come upon this generation.


37 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets and stone those sent to you! How often I’ve wanted to gather your children together, like a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, but you weren’t willing.
38 Look, your house is left to you desolate.
39 For I tell you, you won’t see me again until you say, ‘Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord.’”




Chapter 24


1 Jesus left the temple and was walking away when his disciples came up to him to point out the buildings of the temple.
2 But he responded to them, “Do you see all these things? I tell you the truth, not one stone here will be left on another; every single one will be thrown down.”


3 As he was sitting on the Mount of Olives, the disciples approached him privately and said, “Tell us: when will these things happen? And what will be the sign of your coming and of the end of the age?”
4 Jesus answered them, “Watch out that no one deceives you.
5 For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Messiah,’ and they will deceive many people.
6 You will hear about wars and rumors of wars. Make sure you’re not alarmed, because these things must take place, but the end is not yet.
7 Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and earthquakes in various places.
8 But all these are just the beginning of the birth pains.


9 "Then they will hand you over to be persecuted and will kill you, and you will be hated by all nations because of my name.
10 At that time, many will fall away, betray one another, and hate each other.
11 Many false prophets will appear and deceive a lot of people.
12 Because of the increase of lawlessness, the love of most will grow cold.
13 But the one who endures to the end will be saved.
14 And this gospel of the kingdom will be preached throughout the whole world as a testimony to all nations, and then the end will come.


15 So when you see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by the prophet Daniel, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),
16 then those in Judea must flee to the mountains.
17 The one on the housetop must not go down to take anything out of the house,
18 and the one in the field must not turn back to grab a cloak.
19 How terrible it will be in those days for pregnant women and nursing mothers!
20 Pray that your flight won’t happen in winter or on a Sabbath.
21 For at that time there will be great tribulation, unlike anything that has happened from the beginning of the world until now, and never to be equaled again.
22 If those days had not been cut short, no one would survive, but for the sake of the elect, those days will be shortened.


23 At that time, if anyone says to you, ‘Look, here is the Messiah!’ or ‘There he is!’ don’t believe it.
24 For false messiahs and false prophets will arise and perform great signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, even the elect.
25 See, I’ve told you ahead of time.
26 So if they say to you, ‘Look, he’s in the wilderness,’ don’t go out there, or ‘Look, he’s in the inner rooms,’ don’t believe it.
27 For just as lightning comes from the east and flashes to the west, so will the coming of the Son of Man be.
28 Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather.


29 Immediately after the tribulation of those days, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light; the stars will fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
30 Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and all the tribes of the earth will mourn. They will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.
31 And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.


32 Now learn this lesson from the fig tree: as soon as its branches become tender and sprout leaves, you know that summer is near.
33 In the same way, when you see all these things, you know that he is near, right at the door.
34 I tell you the truth, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things take place.
35 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away.


36 But about that day and hour, no one knows—not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
37 For as it was in the days of Noah, so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.
38 In those days before the flood, people were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, right up to the day Noah entered the ark.
39 They didn’t know what was happening until the flood came and swept them all away. That’s how it will be with the coming of the Son of Man.
40 Two men will be in the field; one will be taken, and the other left.
41 Two women will be grinding at the mill; one will be taken, and the other left.
42 So stay awake, because you don’t know on what day your Lord is coming.


43 But understand this: if the homeowner had known at what time of night the thief was coming, he would have stayed awake and not let his house be broken into.
44 For this reason, you also must be ready, because the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect.


45 Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom the master has put in charge of his household to give them their food at the proper time?
46 Blessed is that servant whom the master finds doing so when he returns.
47 I tell you the truth, he will put him in charge of all his possessions.
48 But if that wicked servant says to himself, ‘My master is delayed,’
49 and starts to beat his fellow servants and eat and drink with drunkards,
50 the master of that servant will come on a day he doesn’t expect and at an hour he doesn’t know.
51 He will cut him to pieces and assign him a place with the hypocrites, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.




Chapter 25


1 "At that time, the kingdom of heaven will be like ten young women who took their lamps and went out to meet the groom.
2 Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
3 The foolish ones took their lamps but didn’t bring any oil with them.
4 The wise ones, however, brought oil in jars along with their lamps.
5 When the groom was delayed, they all got drowsy and fell asleep.
6 But in the middle of the night, a shout rang out: ‘Here’s the groom! Come out to meet him!’
7 Then all the young women woke up and trimmed their lamps.
8 The foolish ones said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil; our lamps are going out.’
9 But the wise ones replied, ‘No, there won’t be enough for both us and you. Go instead to the sellers and buy some for yourselves.’
10 While they were off buying oil, the groom arrived. The ones who were ready went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was shut.
11 Later, the others came back and said, ‘Lord, lord, open the door for us!’
12 But he answered, ‘Truly, I tell you, I don’t know you.’
13 So stay awake, because you don’t know the day or the hour.


14 "It’s like a man going on a journey who called his servants and entrusted his property to them.
15 To one he gave five talents, to another two, and to another one—each according to their ability. Then he left on his trip.
16 The one who received five talents went right away and put them to work, earning five more.
17 Likewise, the one with two talents gained two more.
18 But the one who received one talent went off, dug a hole in the ground, and hid his master’s money.
19 After a long time, the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them.
20 The one who had received five talents came forward and brought the additional five, saying, ‘Master, you entrusted me with five talents; look, I’ve gained five more.’
21 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful with a few things; I’ll put you in charge of many things. Come share your master’s joy.’
22 Then the one with two talents came and said, ‘Master, you entrusted me with two talents; look, I’ve gained two more.’
23 His master said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant! You were faithful with a few things; I’ll put you in charge of many things. Come share your master’s joy.’
24 Then the one who had received one talent came and said, ‘Master, I knew you were a harsh man, reaping where you didn’t sow and gathering where you didn’t scatter.
25 So I was afraid and went and hid your talent in the ground. Here, take what’s yours.’
26 But his master replied, ‘You wicked, lazy servant! You knew I reap where I didn’t sow and gather where I didn’t scatter?
27 Then you should’ve invested my money with the bankers, so that when I returned, I’d get it back with interest.
28 Take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten talents.
29 For to everyone who has, more will be given, and they’ll have an abundance; but from the one who doesn’t have, even what they do have will be taken away.
30 Throw this worthless servant out into the outer darkness, where there’ll be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’


31 "When the Son of Man comes in his glory, with all his angels with him, he’ll sit on his glorious throne.
32 All the nations will be gathered before him, and he’ll separate them from one another, like a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
33 He’ll place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
34 Then the King will say to those on his right, ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
35 For I was hungry, and you gave me something to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink; I was a stranger, and you welcomed me;
36 I was naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you took care of me; I was in prison, and you visited me.’
37 Then the righteous will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you a drink?
38 When did we see you a stranger and welcome you, or naked and clothe you?
39 When did we see you sick or in prison and visit you?’
40 And the King will reply, ‘Truly, I tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and sisters of mine, you did for me.’
41 Then he’ll say to those on his left, ‘Depart from me, you cursed ones, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
42 For I was hungry, and you gave me nothing to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me nothing to drink;
43 I was a stranger, and you didn’t welcome me; I was naked, and you didn’t clothe me; I was sick and in prison, and you didn’t care for me.’
44 Then they’ll answer, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and not help you?’
45 He’ll reply, ‘Truly, I tell you, whatever you didn’t do for one of the least of these, you didn’t do for me.’
46 And they’ll go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."




Chapter 26


1 When Jesus had finished saying all these things, he told his disciples,
2 "You know that the Passover is coming in two days, and the Son of Man will be handed over to be crucified." 


3 At that time, the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in the courtyard of the high priest, whose name was Caiaphas.
4 They plotted together to arrest Jesus secretly and kill him.
5 But they said, "Not during the festival, or there might be a riot among the people."


6 While Jesus was in Bethany at the house of Simon the leper,
7 a woman approached him with an alabaster jar of very expensive perfume. She poured it on his head as he reclined at the table.
8 When the disciples saw this, they were indignant and said, "Why this waste?
9 This perfume could have been sold for a high price and the money given to the poor."
10 Aware of this, Jesus said to them, "Why are you bothering this woman? She has done a beautiful thing for me.
11 You will always have the poor with you, but you will not always have me.
12 When she poured this perfume on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
13 Truly I tell you, wherever this gospel is preached in the whole world, what she has done will also be told in memory of her."


14 Then one of the Twelve, named Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests
15 and said, "What are you willing to give me if I hand him over to you?" They counted out thirty silver coins for him.
16 From that moment, he began looking for an opportunity to betray him.


17 On the first day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread, the disciples came to Jesus and asked, "Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?"
18 He replied, "Go into the city to a certain man and tell him, 'The Teacher says: My time is near; I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.'"
19 The disciples did as Jesus instructed them and prepared the Passover.


20 When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the Twelve.
21 As they were eating, he said, "Truly I tell you, one of you will betray me."
22 Deeply distressed, each one began to say to him, "Surely not I, Lord?"
23 He answered, "The one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me.
24 The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born."
25 Judas, the one who would betray him, said, "Surely not I, Rabbi?" Jesus replied, "You have said it."


26 While they were eating, Jesus took bread, and after giving thanks, he broke it and gave it to the disciples, saying, "Take, eat; this is my body."
27 Then he took a cup, and after giving thanks, he gave it to them, saying, "Drink from it, all of you;
28 for this is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
29 I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father’s kingdom."
30 After singing a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.


31 Then Jesus said to them, "This night you will all fall away because of me, for it is written: 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'
32 But after I am raised, I will go ahead of you into Galilee."
33 Peter responded, "Even if everyone else falls away because of you, I will never fall away."
34 Jesus said to him, "Truly I tell you, this very night, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times."
35 Peter said to him, "Even if I have to die with you, I will not deny you!" And all the disciples said the same thing.


36 Then Jesus went with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he said to his disciples, "Sit here while I go over there and pray."
37 He took Peter and the two sons of Zebedee with him, and he began to be sorrowful and troubled.
38 Then he said to them, "My soul is overwhelmed with sorrow to the point of death. Stay here and keep watch with me."
39 Going a little farther, he fell on his face and prayed, "My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but as you will."
40 He came back to the disciples and found them sleeping, and he said to Peter, "Couldn’t you keep watch with me for one hour?
41 Watch and pray so that you don’t fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak."
42 He went away a second time and prayed, "My Father, if this cannot pass unless I drink it, your will be done."
43 Again he returned and found them sleeping, because their eyes were heavy.
44 So he left them and went away once more and prayed a third time, saying the same thing.
45 Then he returned to the disciples and said, "Are you still sleeping and resting? Look, the hour has come, and the Son of Man is delivered into the hands of sinners.
46 Get up, let’s go! See, my betrayer is here."


47 While he was still speaking, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived. With him was a large crowd armed with swords and clubs, sent from the chief priests and the elders of the people.
48 Now the betrayer had arranged a signal with them: "The one I kiss is the man; arrest him."
49 Immediately he went up to Jesus and said, "Greetings, Rabbi!" and kissed him.
50 Jesus said to him, "Friend, do what you came to do." Then they came forward, seized Jesus, and arrested him.
51 Suddenly, one of those with Jesus reached out, drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, cutting off his ear.
52 Jesus said to him, "Put your sword back in its place, for all who take the sword will perish by the sword.
53 Do you think I cannot call on my Father, and he will at once provide me with more than twelve legions of angels?
54 But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen this way?"
55 At that moment Jesus said to the crowd, "Have you come out with swords and clubs to capture me as if I were a robber? Every day I sat in the temple courts teaching, and you did not arrest me.
56 But all this has happened so that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled." Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.


57 Those who had arrested Jesus led him to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders had gathered.
58 Peter followed him at a distance, right up to the courtyard of the high priest. He entered and sat with the guards to see the outcome.
59 The chief priests and the whole Sanhedrin were looking for false testimony against Jesus so they could put him to death,
60 but they found none, even though many false witnesses came forward. Finally, two came forward
61 and said, "This man said, 'I am able to destroy the temple of God and rebuild it in three days.'"
62 The high priest stood up and said to him, "Have you no answer to what these men are testifying against you?"
63 But Jesus remained silent. The high priest said to him, "I charge you under oath by the living God: Tell us if you are the Messiah, the Son of God."
64 Jesus replied, "You have said it. But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of heaven."
65 Then the high priest tore his robes and said, "He has blasphemed! Why do we need any more witnesses? Look, you have now heard the blasphemy.
66 What do you think?" They answered, "He deserves death."
67 Then they spit in his face and struck him. Some slapped him,
68 saying, "Prophesy to us, Messiah! Who hit you?"


69 Meanwhile, Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. A servant girl came up to him and said, "You were with Jesus the Galilean too."
70 But he denied it in front of everyone, saying, "I don’t know what you’re talking about."
71 When he went out to the gateway, another servant girl saw him and said to the people there, "This man was with Jesus of Nazareth."
72 Again he denied it with an oath: "I don’t know the man!"
73 A little later, those standing there came up to Peter and said, "Surely you are one of them; your accent gives you away."
74 Then he began to curse and swear, "I don’t know the man!" Immediately a rooster crowed.
75 Then Peter remembered what Jesus had said: "Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times." And he went outside and wept bitterly.




Chapter 27


1 When morning came, all the chief priests and the elders of the people conferred together against Jesus to put him to death.
2 They bound him, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate, the governor.


3 Then Judas, the one who betrayed him, saw that Jesus had been condemned. Overcome with remorse, he returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
4 saying, “I have sinned by betraying innocent blood.” But they replied, “What’s that to us? That’s your problem.”
5 So Judas threw the silver into the temple and left. Then he went away and hanged himself.
6 The chief priests picked up the silver and said, “It’s not lawful to put this into the treasury, since it’s blood money.”
7 After deliberating, they used it to buy the potter’s field as a burial place for foreigners.
8 That’s why that field has been called the Field of Blood to this day.
9 Then what was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled: “They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price set on him by some of the sons of Israel,
10 and they gave them for the potter’s field, as the Lord directed me.”


11 Now Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor questioned him, saying, “Are you the King of the Jews?” Jesus responded, “You say so.”
12 But when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he gave no answer.
13 Then Pilate said to him, “Don’t you hear how many things they’re testifying against you?”
14 Yet Jesus didn’t respond to him with even a single word, which greatly amazed the governor.


15 At the festival, it was the governor’s custom to release one prisoner to the crowd, whomever they wanted.
16 At that time, they had a notorious prisoner named Barabbas.
17 So when the crowd had gathered, Pilate asked them, “Who do you want me to release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called the Messiah?”
18 For he knew they had handed Jesus over out of envy.
19 While Pilate was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent him a message: “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I’ve suffered greatly today in a dream because of him.”
20 But the chief priests and elders persuaded the crowds to ask for Barabbas and to have Jesus put to death.
21 The governor asked them again, “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” They shouted, “Barabbas!”
22 Pilate said to them, “Then what should I do with Jesus, who is called the Messiah?” They all yelled, “Crucify him!”
23 He asked, “Why? What crime has he committed?” But they shouted even louder, “Crucify him!”


24 When Pilate saw that he was getting nowhere and that a riot was starting, he took water and washed his hands in front of the crowd, saying, “I’m innocent of this man’s blood. See [to it] yourselves!”
25 All the people answered, “His blood be on us and on our children!”
26 Then he released Barabbas to them, but he had Jesus flogged and handed him over to be crucified.


27 Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium and gathered the whole cohort around him.
28 They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him.
29 After twisting together a crown of thorns, they placed it on his head and put a reed in his right hand. Kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!”
30 They spat on him, took the reed, and struck him on the head.
31 When they had finished mocking him, they took off the robe, put his own clothes back on him, and led him away to crucify him.


32 As they were going out, they found a man from Cyrene named Simon, and they forced him to carry Jesus’ cross.
33 When they came to a place called Golgotha (which means Place of the Skull),
34 they offered him wine mixed with gall to drink. But after tasting it, he refused to drink it.
35 After crucifying him, they divided his clothes among themselves by casting lots.
36 Then they sat down and kept watch over him there.
37 Above his head, they placed the written charge against him: “This is Jesus, the King of the Jews.”
38 Two robbers were crucified with him, one on his right and one on his left.


39 Those passing by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads
40 and saying, “You who were going to destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days, save yourself! If you’re the Son of God, come down from the cross!”
41 Likewise, the chief priests, along with the scribes and elders, mocked him, saying,
42 “He saved others, but he can’t save himself! He’s the King of Israel—let him come down from the cross now, and we’ll believe in him.
43 He trusts in God; let God rescue him now if He wants him, for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’”
44 Even the robbers crucified with him were taunting him in the same way.


45 From noon until three in the afternoon, darkness covered the whole land.
46 Around three o’clock, Jesus cried out with a loud voice, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?”—which means, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
47 Some of those standing there, hearing this, said, “He’s calling for Elijah.”
48 Immediately one of them ran, took a sponge, filled it with sour wine, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink.
49 But the others said, “Wait, let’s see if Elijah comes to save him.”
50 Then Jesus cried out again with a loud voice and gave up his spirit.


51 At that moment, the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom. The earth shook, and the rocks split apart.
52 The tombs broke open, and the bodies of many holy people who had died were raised to life.
53 They came out of the tombs after his resurrection, entered the holy city, and appeared to many people.
54 When the centurion and those with him guarding Jesus saw the earthquake and everything that had happened, they were terrified and said, “Truly, this was the Son of God!”


55 Many women were there, watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him.
56 Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee’s sons.


57 As evening approached, a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph, who had also become a disciple of Jesus, came forward.
58 He went to Pilate and asked for Jesus’ body. Pilate ordered that it be given to him.
59 Joseph took the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
60 and placed it in his own new tomb, which he had cut out of the rock. He rolled a large stone against the entrance of the tomb and left.
61 Mary Magdalene and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the tomb.


62 The next day, which was the day after the Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered before Pilate.
63 They said, “Sir, we remember that while he was still alive, that deceiver said, ‘After three days I will rise again.’
64 So give the order to secure the tomb until the third day, otherwise his disciples might come, steal him away, and tell the people, ‘He has risen from the dead.’ Then the last deception will be worse than the first.”
65 Pilate said to them, “You have a guard. Go and make it as secure as you know how.”
66 So they went and secured the tomb by sealing the stone and posting the guard.




Chapter 28


1 After the Sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to see the tomb.
2 Suddenly, there was a powerful earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven, approached the tomb, rolled back the stone, and sat on it.
3 His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing was white as snow.
4 The guards were so terrified of him that they shook and became like dead men.


5 But the angel spoke to the women, saying, “Don’t be afraid, for I know you’re looking for Jesus, who was crucified.
6 He’s not here; he has risen, just as he said. Come, see the place where he was lying.
7 Then go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. You’ll see him there.’ Look, I’ve told you.”


8 So they left the tomb quickly, with fear and great joy, and ran to report this to his disciples.
9 Suddenly, Jesus met them and said, “Greetings!” They came up to him, took hold of his feet, and worshiped him.
10 Then Jesus said to them, “Don’t be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to head to Galilee; they’ll see me there.”


11 While they were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened.
12 After meeting with the elders and making a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money,
13 instructing them, “Say this: ‘His disciples came at night and stole him while we were asleep.’
14 And if this gets back to the governor, we’ll handle him and keep you out of trouble.”
15 So they took the money and did as they were told. And this story has been spread among the Jews to this day.


16 Now the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had directed them.
17 When they saw him, they worshiped him, though some hesitated.
18 Jesus came up to them and said, “All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
19 So go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
20 teaching them to obey everything I’ve commanded you. And look, I am with you always, to the end of the age.”