The Gospel of Luke


Chapter 1


1 Since many have undertaken to compile a narrative about the events that have been fulfilled among us,
2 just as those who were eyewitnesses from the beginning and servants of the word handed them down to us,
3 it seemed good to me also, having carefully investigated everything from the start, to write an orderly account for you, most excellent Theophilus,
4 so that you may know the certainty of the things you have been taught.


5 In the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a priest named Zechariah, from the division of Abijah, and he had a wife from the daughters of Aaron, named Elizabeth.
6 They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and statutes of the Lord.
7 But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and both were advanced in years.


8 Now while he was serving as priest before God when his division was on duty,
9 according to the custom of the priesthood, he was chosen by lot to enter the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
10 And the whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.
11 And there appeared to him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
12 And Zechariah was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.
13 But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John.
14 And you will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth,
15 for he will be great before the Lord. And he must not drink wine or strong drink, and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother’s womb.
16 And he will turn many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God,
17 and he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.”


18 And Zechariah said to the angel, “How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years.”
19 And the angel answered him, “I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God, and I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news.
20 And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak until the day that these things take place, because you did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.”
21 And the people were waiting for Zechariah, and they were wondering at his delay in the temple.
22 And when he came out, he was unable to speak to them, and they realized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he kept making signs to them and remained mute.
23 And when his time of service was ended, he went to his home.


24 After these days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and for five months she kept herself hidden, saying,
25 “Thus the Lord has done for me in the days when he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.”


26 In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth,
27 to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin’s name was Mary.
28 And he came to her and said, “Greetings, favored one, the Lord is with you!”
29 But she was greatly troubled at the saying, and tried to discern what sort of greeting this might be.
30 And the angel said to her, “Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God.
31 And you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus.
32 He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David,
33 and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there will be no end.”


34 And Mary said to the angel, “How will this be, since I do not know a man?”
35 And the angel answered her, “The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God.
36 And behold, your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
37 For nothing will be impossible with God.”
38 And Mary said, “Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word.” And the angel departed from her.


39 In those days Mary arose and went with haste into the hill country, to a town in Judah,
40 and she entered the house of Zechariah and greeted Elizabeth.
41 And when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit,
42 and she exclaimed with a loud cry, “Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!
43 And why is this granted to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
44 For when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy.
45 And blessed is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord.”


46 And Mary said, “My soul magnifies the Lord,
47 and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
48 for he has looked on the humble estate of his servant. For from now on all generations will call me blessed;
49 for he who is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is his name.
50 And his mercy is for those who fear him from generation to generation.
51 He has shown strength with his arm; he has scattered the proud in the thoughts of their hearts;
52 he has brought down the mighty from their thrones and exalted those of humble estate;
53 he has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent away empty.
54 He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy,
55 as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and to his offspring forever.”
56 And Mary remained with her about three months and returned to her home.


57 Now the time came for Elizabeth to give birth, and she bore a son.
58 And her neighbors and relatives heard that the Lord had shown great mercy to her, and they rejoiced with her.
59 And on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child. And they would have called him Zechariah after his father,
60 but his mother answered, “No; he shall be called John.”
61 And they said to her, “None of your relatives is called by this name.”
62 And they made signs to his father, inquiring what he wanted him to be called.
63 And he asked for a writing tablet and wrote, “His name is John.” And they all wondered.
64 And immediately his mouth was opened and his tongue loosed, and he spoke, blessing God.
65 And fear came on all their neighbors. And all these things were talked about through all the hill country of Judea,
66 and all who heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, “What then will this child be?” For the hand of the Lord was with him.


67 And Zechariah his father was filled with the Holy Spirit and prophesied, saying,
68 “Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people
69 and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David,
70 as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
71 that we should be saved from our enemies and from the hand of all who hate us;
72 to show the mercy promised to our fathers and to remember his holy covenant,
73 the oath that he swore to our father Abraham, to grant us
74 that we, being delivered from the hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear,
75 in holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
76 And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High; for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways,
77 to give knowledge of salvation to his people in the forgiveness of their sins,
78 because of the tender mercy of our God, whereby the sunrise shall visit us from on high
79 to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.”


80 And the child grew and became strong in spirit, and he was in the wilderness until the day of his public appearance to Israel.




Chapter 2


1 In those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the inhabited world should be registered.
2 This registration first took place while Quirinius was governing Syria.
3 And everyone went to be registered, each to his own city.
4 So Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the city of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David,
5 to be registered with Mary, his betrothed, who was pregnant.
6 And it happened that while they were there, the days were fulfilled for her to give birth.
7 And she gave birth to her firstborn son and wrapped him in cloths and laid him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn.


8 And in that same region, shepherds were staying out in the fields and keeping watch over their flock by night.
9 And an angel of the Lord stood before them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were greatly afraid.
10 And the angel said to them, "Do not be afraid, for I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the men.
11 For today in the city of David a Savior has been born to you, who is Christ the Lord.
12 And this will be the sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger."
13 And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying,
14 "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace to men of good-will."


15 And it happened that when the angels had departed from them into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, "Let us go now to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us."
16 And they went with haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the baby lying in the manger.
17 And when they saw it, they made known the saying that had been told them concerning the child.
18 And all who heard it marveled at what was spoken to them by the shepherds.
19 But Mary kept all these things, pondering them in her heart.
20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all they had heard and seen, just as it had been told them.


21 And when eight days were completed for his circumcision, his name was called Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.


22 And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were completed, they brought him up to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord
23 (as it is written in the law of the Lord, "Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord")
24 and to offer a sacrifice according to what is stated in the law of the Lord, "a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons."


25 And there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, and this man was righteous and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
26 And it had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he would not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.
27 And he came in the Spirit into the temple, and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do for him according to the custom of the law,
28 he took him into his arms and blessed God and said,
29 "Lord, now you are letting your servant depart in peace, according to your word;
30 for my eyes have seen your salvation,
31 which you have prepared in the presence of all the nations,
32 a light for revelation to the Gentiles and glory to your people Israel."


33 And his father and mother were marveling at the things being said about him.
34 And Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother, "Behold, this child is appointed for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and for a sign that will be opposed—
35 and a sword will pierce through your own soul also—so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed."


36 And there was Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher. She was advanced in years, having lived with her husband seven years from her virginity,
37 and then as a widow until she was eighty-four. She did not depart from the temple, worshiping with fasting and prayer night and day.
38 And coming up at that very hour, she began to give thanks to God and to speak of him to all who were waiting for pthe redemption of Jerusalem.


39 And when they had completed everything according to the law of the Lord, they returned to Galilee, to their own city of Nazareth.
40 And the child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom, and the favor of God was upon him.


41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the Feast of the Passover.
42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up according to the custom of the feast.
43 And when the days were completed, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem, and his parents did not know it.
44 But supposing him to be in the company, they went a day’s journey, and they sought him among their relatives and acquaintances.
45 And when they did not find him, they returned to Jerusalem, seeking him.
46 And it happened that after three days they found him in the temple, sitting among the teachers, listening to them and asking them questions.
47 And all who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers.
48 And when they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, "Son, why have you treated us this way? Look, your father and I have been searching for you in great distress."
49 And he said to them, "Why were you looking for me? Did you not know that I must be involved in the things of my Father?"
50 And they did not understand the saying that he spoke to them.


51 And he went down with them and came to Nazareth and was submissive to them. And his mother kept all these things in her heart.
52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in favor with God and man.




Chapter 3


1 Now in the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar’s reign, when Pontius Pilate was governing Judea, Herod was tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip was tetrarch of the region of Iturea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene,
2 during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zechariah, in the wilderness.
3 He went into all the region around the Jordan, proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins,
4 as it is written in the book of the prophet Isaiah: “The voice of one crying in the wilderness: ‘Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough ways smooth;
6 and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.’”


7 So he said to the crowds that came out to be baptized by him, “You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?
8 Bear fruits worthy of repentance. Do not begin to say to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham as our father.’ For I tell you, God is able to raise up children of Abraham from these stones.
9 Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees; every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.”


10 The crowds asked him, “What then shall we do?”
11 He answered them, “He who has two tunics, let him share with him who has none; and he who has food, let him do likewise.”
12 Tax collectors also came to be baptized and said to him, “Teacher, what shall we do?”
13 He said to them, “Collect no more than what is prescribed for you.”
14 Soldiers also asked him, “And we, what shall we do?” He said to them, “Do not extort money from anyone by threats or false accusation, and be content with your wages.”


15 As the people were in expectation, and all men questioned in their hearts concerning John, whether he might be the Christ,
16 John answered them all, “I baptize you with water; but he who is mightier than I is coming, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
17 His winnowing fork is in his hand, to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”


18 So, with many other exhortations, he preached good news to the people.
19 But Herod the tetrarch, who had been reproved by him for Herodias, his brother’s wife, and for all the evil things that Herod had done,
20 added this to them all, that he locked up John in prison.


21 Now when all the men were baptized, Jesus also was baptized, and while he was praying, heaven was opened,
22 and the Holy Spirit descended upon him in bodily form, like a dove; and a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”


23 Jesus, when he began his ministry, was about thirty years of age, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
24 the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
25 the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
26 the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Josech, the son of Joda,
27 the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
28 the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
29 the son of Joshua, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
30 the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
31 the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
32 the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Sala, the son of Nahshon,
33 the son of Amminadab, the son of Admin, the son of Arni, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
34 the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
35 the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
36 the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
37 the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
38 the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.




Chapter 4


1 Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
2 where he was tempted by the devil for forty days. During that time, he ate nothing, and when it was over, he was hungry.
3 The devil said to him, "If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread."
4 Jesus answered him, "It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone.'"
5 Then the devil led him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
6 The devil said to him, "I will give you all this authority and their glory, for it has been handed over to me, and I give it to whomever I wish.
7 Then, If you will worship me, it will all be yours."
8 Jesus answered him, "It is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve only him.'"


9 Then he brought him to Jerusalem and set him on the pinnacle of the temple and said to him, "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here,
10 for it is written, 'He will command his angels concerning you, to guard you,'
11 and 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.'"
12 Jesus answered him, "It is said, 'You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.'"
13 When the devil had finished every temptation, he departed from him until an opportune time.


14 Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee, and news about him spread throughout the surrounding region.
15 He was teaching in their synagogues, being glorified by all.


16 He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as was his custom, he entered the synagogue on the Sabbath day and stood up to read.
17 The scroll of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him, and unrolling the scroll, he found the place where it was written,
18 "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim release to the captives and recovery of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed,
19 to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor."
20 He rolled up the scroll, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fixed on him.
21 He began to say to them, "Today this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing."
22 All were speaking well of him and marveling at the gracious words that were coming from his mouth. They said, "Is this not Joseph's son?"
23 He said to them, "Doubtless you will quote to me this proverb, 'Physician, heal yourself.' What we have heard you did at Capernaum, do here in your hometown as well."
24 He said, "Truly, I say to you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown.
25 But in truth, I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heavens were shut up three years and six months, and a great famine came over all the land,
26 and Elijah was sent to none of them but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a widow there.
27 And there were many lepers in Israel in the time of the prophet Elisha, and none of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian."
28 When they heard these things, all in the synagogue were filled with wrath.
29 They rose up, drove him out of the town, and brought him to the edge of the hill on which their town was built, so that they could throw him down the cliff.
30 But passing through their midst, he went away.


31 He went down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and was teaching them on the Sabbath.
32 They were astonished at his teaching, for his word possessed authority.
33 In the synagogue there was a man who had the spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
34 "Ha! What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are—the Holy One of God."
35 Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Be silent and come out of him!" And when the demon had thrown him down in their midst, it came out of him without harming him.
36 Amazement came upon all, and they spoke to one another, saying, "What is this message? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!"
37 And reports about him went out into every place in the surrounding region.


38 He arose and left the synagogue and entered Simon's house. Now Simon's mother-in-law was suffering from a high fever, and they asked him about her.
39 He stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her. Immediately she rose and began to serve them.


40 When the sun was setting, all those who had any who were sick with various diseases brought them to him, and he laid his hands on every one of them and healed them.
41 Demons also came out of many, crying, "You are the Son of God!" But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.


42 When it was day, he departed and went into a desolate place. The crowds were seeking him and came to him, and they tried to keep him from leaving them.
43 But he said to them, "I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other towns as well, for I was sent for this purpose."
44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Judea.




Chapter 5


1 While the crowd was pressing in on Jesus and listening to the word of God, he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret.
2 He saw two boats lying at the edge of the lake, but the fishermen had gotten out of them and were washing their nets.
3 Getting into one of the boats, which belonged to Simon, he asked him to put out a little from the land. Then he sat down and began teaching the crowds from the boat.
4 When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, “Put out into the deep water and let down your nets for a catch.”
5 Simon answered, “Master, we worked hard all night and caught nothing. But at your word, I will let down the nets.”
6 When they had done this, they enclosed a great number of fish, and their nets began to break.
7 They signaled to their partners in the other boat to come and help them. They came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink.
8 When Simon Peter saw this, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, “Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord!”
9 For he and all who were with him were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken,
10 and so were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. Jesus said to Simon, “Do not fear; from now on you will be catching men.”
11 When they had brought their boats to land, they left everything and followed him.


12 While he was in one of the cities, a man full of leprosy came to him. Seeing Jesus, he fell on his face and begged him, “Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean.”
13 Stretching out his hand, he touched him, saying, “I am willing; be clean.” Immediately the leprosy left him.
14 He ordered him to tell no one, “But go, show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing what Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”
15 Yet the report about him spread even more, and great crowds gathered to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses.
16 But he would withdraw to desolate places and pray.


17 On one of those days, while he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law were sitting there, who had come from every village of Galilee and Judea and from Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with him to heal.
18 Some men came carrying a paralyzed man on a mat and tried to bring him in and set him before Jesus.
19 Not finding a way to bring him in because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him with his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd, right in front of Jesus.
20 Seeing their faith, he said, “Man, your sins are forgiven you.”
21 The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, “Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins but God alone?”
22 Jesus, knowing their thoughts, answered them, “Why do you reason like this in your hearts?
23 Which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven you,’ or to say, ‘Rise and walk’?
24 But so that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he said to the paralyzed man—“I say to you, rise, pick up your mat, and go to your house.”
25 Immediately he stood up before them, took what he had been lying on, and went to his house glorifying God.
26 Amazement seized them all, and they glorified God and were filled with awe, saying, “We have seen extraordinary things today.”


27 After this, he went out and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax booth. He said to him, “Follow me.”
28 Leaving everything, he rose and followed him.
29 Levi made him a great feast in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others reclining at table with them.
30 The Pharisees and their scribes grumbled at his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?”
31 Jesus answered them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick do.
32 I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”


33 They said to him, “The disciples of John fast often and offer prayers, and so do the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink.”
34 Jesus said to them, “Can you make the sons of the bridechamber fast while the bridegroom is with them?
35 The days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will fast in those days.”
36 He also told them a parable: “No one tears a piece from a new garment and puts it on an old garment. If he does, he will tear the new, and the piece from the new will not match the old.
37 And no one puts new wine into old wineskins. If he does, the new wine will burst the skins and spill, and the skins will be destroyed.
38 But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins.
39 And no one after drinking old wine desires new, for he says, ‘The old is good.’”




Chapter 6


1 Now it happened on a Sabbath that He was passing through grainfields, and His disciples were picking and eating the heads of grain, and rubbing them in their hands.
2 But some of the Pharisees said, “Why are you doing what is not lawful on the Sabbath?”
3 And Jesus answered them, saying, “Have you not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those who were with him?
4 How he entered the house of God and took the bread of the Presence, which is not lawful for anyone to eat except the priests alone, and he ate it and gave it to those with him?”
5 And He said to them, “The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”


6 On another Sabbath, He entered the synagogue and was teaching, and there was a man there whose right hand was withered.
7 The scribes and the Pharisees were watching Him closely to see if He would heal on the Sabbath, so they might find a reason to accuse Him.
8 But He knew their thoughts and said to the man with the withered hand, “Get up and stand in the middle.” And he got up and stood there.
9 Then Jesus said to them, “I ask you, is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or to do harm, to save a life or to destroy it?”
10 And after looking around at them all, He said to him, “Stretch out your hand.” And he did so, and his hand was restored.
11 But they were filled with rage and discussed with one another what they might do to Jesus.


12 Now in those days, He went out to the mountain to pray, and He spent the whole night in prayer to God.
13 And when day came, He called His disciples and chose twelve of them, whom He also named apostles:
14 Simon, whom He also named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James and John, and Philip and Bartholomew,
15 and Matthew and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot,
16 and Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.


17 And He came down with them and stood on a level place with a large crowd of His disciples and a great multitude of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem and the coastal region of Tyre and Sidon,
18 who had come to hear Him and to be healed of their diseases. And those who were troubled by unclean spirits were being cured.
19 And the whole crowd was trying to touch Him, because power was coming from Him and healing them all.


20 And lifting up His eyes to His disciples, He said, “Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God.
21 Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be satisfied. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
22 Blessed are you when men hate you, and when they exclude you and insult you and reject your name as evil because of the Son of Man.
23 Rejoice in that day and leap for joy, for see how your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same to the prophets.


24 But woe to you who are rich, for you have received your comfort.
25 Woe to you who are full now, for you will hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
26 Woe to you when all men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same to the false prophets.


27 But I say to you who hear, love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
28 bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
29 To the one who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also, and from the one who takes your cloak, do not withhold your tunic either.
30 Give to everyone who asks you, and from the one who takes your things, do not demand them back.
31 And just as you want men to do to you, do to them likewise.


32 If you love those who love you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
33 And if you do good to those who do good to you, what benefit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
34 And if you lend to those from whom you expect to receive, what benefit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners to receive back the same amount.
35 But love your enemies, and do good. And lend, expecting nothing in return. Your reward will be great, and you will be sons of the Most High, for He is kind to the ungrateful and the evil.
36 Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.


37 Do not judge, and you will not be judged; do not condemn, and you will not be condemned; forgive, and you will be forgiven.
38 Give, and it will be given to you—a good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap. For with the measure you use, it will be measured back to you.”


39 And He also spoke a parable to them: “Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a pit?
40 A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone who is fully trained will be like his teacher.
41 Why do you see the speck in your brother’s eye, but do not notice the log in your own eye?
42 How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take out the speck in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log in your own eye? You hypocrite! First take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take out the speck from your brother’s eye.


43 For there is no good tree that produces bad fruit, nor again a bad tree that produces good fruit.
44 For each tree is known by its own fruit. For men do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they pick grapes from a bramble bush.
45 The good man out of the good treasure of his heart produces good works, and the evil man out of his evil treasure produces evil works, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.


46 How can you call Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ but not do what I say?
47 Everyone who comes to Me and hears My words and does them, I will show you what he is like:
48 he is like a man building a house, who dug deep and laid a foundation on the rock. And when a flood came, the stream burst against that house and could not shake it, because it had been well built.
49 But the one who hears and does not do them is like a man who built a house on the ground without a foundation, against which the stream burst, and immediately it collapsed, and the ruin of that house was great.”




Chapter 7


1 Now when he had finished all his sayings in the hearing of the crowd, he entered Capernaum.
2 A centurion there had a slave whom he valued highly, who was sick and about to die.
3 When he heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him, asking him to come and heal his slave.
4 When they came to Jesus, they pleaded with him earnestly, saying, “He is worthy for you to grant this to him,
5 for he loves our nation and even built our synagogue for us.”
6 So Jesus went with them. When he was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends, saying to him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof.
7 That is why I did not consider myself worthy to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed.
8 For I too am a man placed under authority, with soldiers under me, and I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes, and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes, and to my slave, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.”
9 When Jesus heard this, he marveled at him and, turning to the crowd following him, said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.”
10 When those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the slave in good health.


11 Soon afterward, he went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and a large crowd went with him.
12 As he approached the gate of the town, a man who had died was being carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. A sizable crowd from the town was with her.
13 When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her and said to her, “Do not weep.”
14 Then he came up and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still. He said, “Young man, I say to you, arise.”
15 The dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother.
16 Fear seized them all, and they glorified God, saying, “A great prophet has risen among us!” and “God has visited his people!”
17 This report about him spread throughout Judea and all the surrounding region.


18 The disciples of John reported all these things to him. So John called two of his disciples
19 and sent them to the Lord, saying, “Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?”
20 When the men came to him, they said, “John the Baptist has sent us to you, saying, ‘Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another?’”
21 At that very hour, he healed many men of diseases and afflictions and evil spirits, and to many who were blind he granted sight.
22 He answered them, “Go and tell John what you have seen and heard: the blind receive sight, the lame walk, lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news preached to them.
23 Blessed is the man who does not stumble because of me.”


24 When John’s messengers had left, he began to speak to the crowds about John: “What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?
25 But what did you go out to see? A man dressed in soft clothing? Look, those who wear fine clothing and live in luxury are in kings’ courts.
26 But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
27 This is he of whom it is written, ‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.’
28 I tell you, among those born of women, no one is greater than John, yet the one who is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he.”
29 (All the crowd who heard this, including the tax collectors, acknowledged God’s justice, having been baptized with the baptism of John.
30 But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected God’s purpose for themselves, not having been baptized by him.)


31 “To what then shall I compare the men of this generation, and what are they like?
32 They are like children sitting in the marketplace and calling to one another, ‘We played the flute for you, and you did not dance; we sang a lament, and you did not weep.’
33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, ‘He has a demon.’
34 The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, ‘Look, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’
35 Yet wisdom is vindicated by all her children.”


36 One of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he went into the Pharisee’s house and reclined at table.
37 And behold, a woman in the city, who was a sinner, when she learned that he was reclining at table in the Pharisee’s house, brought an alabaster flask of ointment.
38 Standing behind him at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
39 When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would know who and what sort of woman this is who is touching him, for she is a sinner.”
40 Jesus, answering, said to him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” And he replied, “Say it, Teacher.”
41 “A certain moneylender had two debtors. One owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
42 When they could not pay, he forgave them both. Now which of them will love him more?”
43 Simon answered, “I suppose the one for whom he forgave more.” And he said to him, “You have judged rightly.”
44 Then turning toward the woman, he said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair.
45 You gave me no kiss, but from the time I came in, she has not stopped kissing my feet.
46 You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
47 Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much. But he who is forgiven little, loves little.”
48 And he said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
49 Those who were reclining at table with him began to say among themselves, “Who is this who even forgives sins?”
50 And he said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”




Chapter 8


1 Soon afterward, he was traveling from one city and village to another, proclaiming and announcing the good news of the kingdom of God. The Twelve were with him,
2 along with some women who had been healed of evil spirits and diseases: Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
3 Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, Susanna, and many others who were providing for them out of their own resources.


4 When a large crowd had gathered and men were coming to him from every city, he spoke through a parable:
5 “A sower went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell along the path and was trampled underfoot, and the birds of the sky ate it up.
6 Other seed fell on the rock, and when it grew, it withered because it had no moisture.
7 Other seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up with it and choked it.
8 Still other seed fell on good soil, and when it grew, it produced a hundredfold.” As he said these things, he called out, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”


9 His disciples asked him what this parable meant.
10 He said, “To you it has been given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest it is given in parables, so that seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.
11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
12 Those along the path are the ones who hear, but then the devil comes and takes away the word from their hearts, so that they may not believe and be saved.
13 Those on the rock are the ones who, when they hear, receive the word with joy, but they have no root; they believe for a while, but in a time of testing they fall away.
14 That which fell among the thorns, these are the ones who hear, but as they go on their way, they are choked by the cares and riches and pleasures of life, and their fruit does not mature.
15 But the seed falling on the good soil, these are the ones who, having heard the word with an honest and good heart, hold it fast and bear fruit with endurance.


16 “No one after lighting a lamp covers it with a basket or puts it under a bed, but he sets it on a stand, so that those who enter may see the light.
17 For nothing is hidden that will not be revealed, nor secret that will not be known and come to light.
18 Take care, then, how you hear; for to the one who has, more will be given, and from the one who does not have, even what he thinks he has will be taken away.”


19 Then his mother and his brothers came to him, but they could not reach him because of the crowd.
20 Someone told him, “Your mother and your brothers are standing outside, wanting to see you.”
21 But he answered them, “My mother and my brothers are those who hear the word of God and do it.”


22 One day he got into a boat with his disciples, and he said to them, “Let us go across to the other side of the lake.” So they set out,
23 and as they sailed, he fell asleep. A windstorm came down on the lake, and they were filling with water and were in danger.
24 They went to him and woke him, saying, “Master, Master, we are perishing!” He awoke and rebuked the wind and the raging waves, and they ceased, and there was a calm.
25 He said to them, “Where is your faith?” They were afraid and amazed, saying to one another, “Who then is this, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?”


26 Then they sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee.
27 When he stepped ashore, a man from the city who had demons met him. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he did not live in a house but among the tombs.
28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him and said with a loud voice, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.”
29 For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (For many times it had seized him; he was kept under guard and bound with chains and shackles, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the wilderness.)
30 Jesus asked him, “What is your name?” He said, “Legion,” for many demons had entered him.
31 They begged him not to command them to go into the abyss.
32 Now a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside, and they pleaded with him to let them enter them. He gave them permission.
33 Then the demons came out of the man and entered the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and drowned.


34 When the herdsmen saw what had happened, they fled and told it in the city and in the country.
35 Then men went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid.
36 Those who had seen it told them how the demon-possessed man had been healed.
37 Then all the men of the surrounding region of the Gerasenes asked Jesus to depart from them, for they were seized with great fear. So he got into the boat and returned.
38 The man from whom the demons had gone begged to be with him, but he sent him away, saying,
39 “Return to your home, and declare how much God has done for you.” So he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole city how much Jesus had done for him.


40 Now when Jesus returned, the crowd welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
41 And a man named Jairus came, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell at Jesus’ feet and begged him to come to his house,
42 for he had an only daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. As he went, the crowds pressed around him.


43 And a woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years and could not be healed by anyone
44 came up behind him and touched the fringe of his garment, and immediately her flow of blood ceased.
45 Jesus said, “Who touched me?” When all denied it, Peter said, “Master, the crowds surround you and are pressing in on you!”
46 But Jesus said, “Someone touched me, for I know that power has gone out from me.”
47 When the woman saw that she was not hidden, she came trembling and fell down before him and declared in the presence of all the men why she had touched him, and how she had been immediately healed.
48 He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well; go in peace.”


49 While he was still speaking, someone came from the ruler’s house, saying, “Your daughter is dead; do not trouble the Teacher anymore.”
50 But Jesus, on hearing this, answered him, “Do not fear; only believe, and she will be well.”
51 When he came to the house, he allowed no one to enter with him except Peter, John, and James, and the child’s father and mother.
52 They were all weeping and mourning for her, but he said, “Do not weep, for she is not dead but sleeping.”
53 And they laughed at him, knowing that she was dead.
54 But taking her by the hand, he called, saying, “Child, arise.”
55 Her life returned, and she got up at once. He directed that something should be given her to eat.
56 Her parents were astonished, but he charged them to tell no one what had happened.




Chapter 9


1 Now when he had called together his twelve disciples, he gave them authority and power over all demons and to heal diseases.
2 He sent them out to proclaim the kingdom of God and to cure the sick.
3 He said to them, "Take nothing for the journey—no staff, no bag, no bread, no money, and do not have two tunics each.
4 Whatever house you enter, stay there, until you leave from that place.
5 And wherever they do not receive you, as you leave that town, shake the dust off your feet as a testimony against them."
6 So they went out and traveled through the villages, preaching the gospel and healing everywhere.


7 Herod the tetrarch heard about everything that was happening, and he was perplexed because some were saying that John had been raised from the dead,
8 others that Elijah had appeared, and still others that one of the ancient prophets had risen.
9 Herod said, "I beheaded John. Who then is this about whom I hear such things?" And he sought to see him.


10 When the apostles returned, they reported to him all that they had done. Taking them with him, he withdrew privately to a town called Bethsaida.
11 But the crowds learned of it and followed him. He welcomed them, spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and healed those who needed healing.
12 As the day began to draw to a close, the Twelve came to him and said, "Send the crowd away so they can go into the surrounding villages and countryside to find lodging and food, for we are in a remote place here."
13 But he said to them, "You give them something to eat." They replied, "We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we go and buy food for all these men."
14 For there were about five thousand men. He said to his disciples, "Have them sit down in groups of about fifty each."
15 They did so and had them all sit down.
16 Taking the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven, blessed them, broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
17 They all ate and were satisfied, and the disciples picked up twelve baskets of the broken pieces that were left over.


18 Now it happened that as he was praying alone, his disciples were with him. He asked them, "Who do the crowds say that I am?"
19 They answered, "John the Baptist; but others say Elijah, and others that one of the ancient prophets has risen."
20 Then he said to them, "But who do you say that I am?" Peter answered, "The Christ of God."
21 He strictly charged and commanded them to tell this to no one,
22 saying, "The Son of Man must suffer many things, be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, be killed, and on the third day be raised."


23 He said to all, "If any man wants to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow me.
24 For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it.
25 For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world but loses or forfeits himself?
26 Whoever is ashamed of me and my words, the Son of Man will be ashamed of him when he comes in his glory and the glory of the Father and of the holy angels.
27 But I tell you truly, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the kingdom of God."


28 About eight days after these sayings, he took Peter, John, and James and went up on the mountain to pray.
29 As he was praying, the appearance of his face changed, and his clothing became dazzling white.
30 And they saw two men talking with him, Moses and Elijah,
31 who appeared in glory and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish in Jerusalem.
32 Now Peter and those with him were heavy with sleep, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
33 As the men were parting from him, Peter said to Jesus, "Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah"—not knowing what he was saying.
34 While he was saying this, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud.
35 A voice came out of the cloud, saying, "This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to him."
36 When the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. They kept silent and told no one in those days anything of what they had seen.


37 On the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
38 And a man from the crowd cried out, "Teacher, I beg of you, look at my son, for he is my only child.
39 A spirit seizes him, and he suddenly cries out; it throws him into convulsions with foaming at the mouth, and it departs from him only after bruising him.
40 I begged your disciples to cast it out, but they could not."
41 Jesus answered, "O faithless and perverse generation, how long will I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here."
42 While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
43 And all were astonished at the majesty of God.


While everyone was marveling at all that he was doing, he said to his disciples,
44 "Let these words sink into your ears: the Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men."
45 But they did not understand this saying, and it was concealed from them so that they did not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.


46 An argument arose among them as to which of them was the greatest.
47 But Jesus, knowing the reasoning of their hearts, took a child and set him by his side,
48 and said to them, "Whoever receives this child in my name receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For he who is least among you all is the one who is great."


49 John answered, "Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we tried to stop him because he does not follow you along with us."
50 But Jesus said to him, "Do not stop him, for he who is not against you is for you."


51 When the days drew near for him to be taken up, he set his face to go to Jerusalem.
52 He sent messengers ahead of him, who went and entered a village of the Samaritans to make preparations for him.
53 But they did not receive him because his face was set toward Jerusalem.
54 When his disciples James and John saw this, they said, "Lord, do you want us to call fire down from heaven to consume them?"
55 But he turned and rebuked them,
56 and they went on to another village.


57 As they were going along the road, a man said to him, "I will follow you wherever you go."
58 Jesus said to him, "Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head."
59 To another he said, "Follow me." But he said, "Lord, let me first go and bury my father."
60 Jesus said to him, "Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but as for you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God."
61 Another said, "I will follow you, Lord, but first let me say farewell to those at my home."
62 Jesus said to him, "No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God."




Chapter 10


1 After this, the Lord appointed seventy-two others and sent them out two by two ahead of him to every town and place where he was about to go.
2 He told them, "The harvest is plentiful, but the workers are few. Ask the Lord of the harvest, therefore, to send out workers into his harvest field.
3 Go! I am sending you out like lambs among wolves.
4 Do not take a purse or bag or sandals; and do not greet anyone on the road.
5 When you enter a house, first say, 'Peace to this house.'
6 If a man of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; if not, it will return to you.
7 Stay in that house, eating and drinking whatever they give you, for the worker deserves his wages. Do not move around from house to house.
8 When you enter a town and are welcomed, eat what is set before you.
9 Heal the sick who are there and tell them, 'The kingdom of God has come near to you.'
10 But when you enter a town and are not welcomed, go into its streets and say,
11 'Even the dust of your town that sticks to our feet we wipe off against you. Yet be sure of this: The kingdom of God has come near.'
12 I tell you, it will be more bearable on that day for Sodom than for that town.


13 Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
14 But it will be more bearable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment than for you.
15 And you, Capernaum, will you be lifted up to the heavens? No, you will go down to Hades.
16 He who listens to you listens to me; he who rejects you rejects me; but he who rejects me rejects him who sent me.


17 The seventy-two returned with joy and said, "Lord, even the demons submit to us in your name."
18 He replied, "I saw Satan fall like lightning from heaven.
19 I have given you authority to trample on snakes and scorpions and to overcome all the power of the enemy; nothing will harm you.
20 However, do not rejoice that the spirits submit to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven."


21 At that time Jesus, full of joy through the Holy Spirit, said, "I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for this was your good pleasure.
22 All things have been committed to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is except the Father, and no one knows who the Father is except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him."
23 Then he turned to his disciples and said privately, "Blessed are the eyes that see what you see.
24 For I tell you that many prophets and kings wanted to see what you see but did not see it, and to hear what you hear but did not hear it."


25 On one occasion an expert in the law stood up to test Jesus. "Teacher," he asked, "what must I do to inherit eternal life?"
26 "What is written in the Law?" he replied. "How do you read it?"
27 He answered, "'Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength and with all your mind'; and, 'Love your neighbor as yourself.'"
28 "You have answered correctly," Jesus replied. "Do this and you will live."
29 But he wanted to justify himself, so he asked Jesus, "And who is my neighbor?"


30 In reply Jesus said: "A man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, when he fell into the hands of robbers. They stripped him of his clothes, beat him and went away, leaving him half dead.
31 A priest happened to be going down the same road, and when he saw the man, he passed by on the other side.
32 So too, a Levite, when he came to the place and saw him, passed by on the other side.
33 But a Samaritan, as he traveled, came where the man was; and when he saw him, he took pity on him.
34 He went to him and bandaged his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. Then he put the man on his own donkey, brought him to an inn and took care of him.
35 The next day he took out two denarii and gave them to the innkeeper. 'Look after him,' he said, 'and when I return, I will reimburse you for any extra expense you may have.'
36 Which of these three do you think was a neighbor to the man who fell into the hands of robbers?"
37 The expert in the law replied, "The one who had mercy on him." Jesus told him, "Go and do likewise."


38 As Jesus and his disciples were on their way, he came to a village where a woman named Martha opened her home to him.
39 She had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord's feet listening to what he said.
40 But Martha was distracted by all the preparations that had to be made. She came to him and asked, "Lord, don't you care that my sister has left me to do the work by myself? Tell her to help me!"
41 "Martha, Martha," the Lord answered, "you are worried and upset about many things,
42 but few things are needed—or indeed only one. Mary has chosen what is better, and it will not be taken away from her."




Chapter 11


1 And it happened that while he was praying in a certain place, when he finished, one of his disciples said to him, "Lord, teach us to pray, just as John taught his disciples."
2 And he said to them, "When you pray, say: Father, let your name be honored as holy; let your kingdom come.
3 Give us each day our daily bread.
4 And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone indebted to us. And do not lead us into temptation."


5 And he said to them, "Which of you will have a friend and will go to him at midnight and say to him, ‘Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
6 since a friend of mine has arrived from a journey to visit me, and I have nothing to set before him’?
7 And that one, answering from inside, says, ‘Do not bother me; the door is already locked, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything.’
8 I tell you, even if he will not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence he will rise and give him whatever he needs."


9 "And I say to you, ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.
10 For everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it will be opened.
11 Now which father among you, if his son asks for a fish, will instead of a fish give him a snake?
12 Or if he asks for an egg, will give him a scorpion?
13 If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father in Heaven give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?"


14 And he was casting out a demon, and the man was mute. And when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke, and the crowds marveled.
15 But some of them said, "By Beelzebul, the ruler of demons, he casts out demons."
16 And others, testing him, were seeking from him a sign from heaven.
17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, "Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and a house divided against a house falls.
18 And if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
19 But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your sons cast them out? Therefore, they will be your judges.
20 But if I cast out demons by the finger of God, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
21 When a strong man, fully armed, guards his own house, his possessions are secure.
22 But when one stronger than he attacks him and overcomes him, he takes away his armor in which he trusted and divides his spoils.
23 The one who is not with me is against me, and the one who does not gather with me scatters."


24 "When an unclean spirit goes out of a man, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, and not finding it, it says, ‘I will return to my house from which I came.’
25 And when it comes, it finds it swept and put in order.
26 Then it goes and brings other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first."


27 And it happened that as he was saying these things, a woman from the crowd raised her voice and said to him, "Blessed is the womb that bore you and the breasts at which you nursed!"
28 But he said, "Rather, blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep it."


29 Now as the crowds were increasing, he began to say, "This generation is an evil generation. It seeks a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah.
30 For just as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so also will the Son of Man be to this generation.
31 The queen of the South will rise up at the judgment with the men of this generation and condemn them, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, something greater than Solomon is here.
32 The men of Nineveh will stand up at the judgment with this generation and condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, something greater than Jonah is here."


33 "No one after lighting a lamp puts it in a cellar or under a basket, but on a stand, so that those who enter may see the light.
34 The lamp of your body is your eye. When your eye is healthy, your whole body is full of light, but when it is bad, your body is full of darkness.
35 Therefore, watch out that the light in you is not darkness.
36 If then your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly bright, as when a lamp with its rays gives you light."


37 While he was speaking, a Pharisee asked him to dine with him. So he went in and reclined at table.
38 The Pharisee was astonished to see that he did not first wash before dinner.
39 And the Lord said to him, "Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside you are full of greed and wickedness.
40 You fools! Did not the one who made the outside make the inside also?
41 But give as alms those things that are within, and behold, everything is clean for you."


42 "But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, and neglect justice and the love of God. These you ought to have done, without neglecting the others.
43 Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seat in the synagogues and greetings in the marketplaces.
44 Woe to you! For you are like unmarked graves, and men walk over them without knowing it."


45 One of the lawyers answered him, "Teacher, in saying these things you insult us also."
46 And he said, "Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with burdens hard to bear, and you yourselves do not touch the burdens with one of your fingers.
47 Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets whom your fathers killed.
48 So you are witnesses and you consent to the deeds of your fathers, for they killed them, and you build their tombs.
49 Therefore also the Wisdom of God said, ‘I will send them prophets and apostles, some of whom they will kill and persecute,’
50 so that the blood of all the prophets, shed from the foundation of the world, may be charged against this generation,
51 from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zechariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.
52 Woe to you lawyers! For you have taken away the key of knowledge. You did not enter yourselves, and you hindered those who were entering."


53 As he went away from there, the scribes and the Pharisees began to press him hard and to provoke him, asking about many things,
54 lying in wait for him, to catch him in something he might say.




Chapter 12


1 Meanwhile, when a crowd of many thousands had gathered, so that they were trampling one another, he began to say to his disciples first, "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
2 Nothing is covered up that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known.
3 Therefore whatever you have said in the dark will be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in private rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops.


4 I tell you, my friends, do not fear those who kill the body, and cannot do anything else to you after that.
5 But I will warn you whom to fear: fear him who, after he has killed, has authority to cast into hell. Yes, I tell you, fear him!
6 Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? And not one of them is forgotten before God.
7 Why, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not; you are of more value than many sparrows.


8 And I tell you, everyone who acknowledges me before men, the Son of Man also will acknowledge before the angels of God,
9 but he who denies me before men will be denied before the angels of God.
10 And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but he who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
11 And when they bring you before the synagogues and the rulers and the authorities, do not be anxious about how you should defend yourself or what you should say,
12 for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that very hour what you ought to say."


13 Someone in the crowd said to him, "Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."
14 But he said to him, "Man, who made me a judge or arbitrator over you?"
15 And he said to them, "Take care, and be on your guard against all covetousness, for a man’s life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions."
16 And he told them a parable, saying, "The land of a rich man produced plentifully,
17 and he thought to himself, ‘What shall I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?’
18 And he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
19 And I will say to myself, “You have ample goods laid up for yourself for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.”’
20 But God said to him, ‘Fool! This night your life is required of you, and the things you have prepared, whose will they be?’
21 So is the man who lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God."


22 And he said to his disciples, "Therefore I tell you, do not be anxious about your life, what you will eat, nor about your body, what you will put on.
23 For life is more than food, and the body more than clothing.
24 Consider the ravens: they neither sow nor reap, they have neither storehouse nor barn, and yet God feeds them. Of how much more value are you than the birds!
25 And which of you by being anxious can add a single hour to his span of life?
26 If then you are not able to do as small a thing as that, why are you anxious about the rest?
27 Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin, yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
28 But if God so clothes the grass, which is alive in the field today, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you of little faith!
29 And do not seek what you are to eat and what you are to drink, nor be worried.
30 For all the nations of the world seek after these things, and your Father knows that you need them.
31 Instead, seek his kingdom, and these things will be added to you.


32 Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.
33 Sell your possessions, and give to the needy. Provide yourselves with moneybags that do not grow old, with a treasure in the heavens that does not fail, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys.
34 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.


35 Stay dressed for action and keep your lamps burning,
36 and be like men who are waiting for their master to come home from the wedding feast, so that they may open the door to him at once when he comes and knocks.
37 Blessed are those servants whom the master finds awake when he comes. Truly, I say to you, he will dress himself for service and have them recline at table, and he will come and serve them.
38 If he comes in the second watch, or in the third, and finds them awake, blessed are those servants!
39 But know this, that if the master of the house had known at what hour the thief was coming, he would not have left his house to be broken into.
40 You also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect."


41 Peter said, "Lord, are you telling this parable for us or for all?"
42 And the Lord said, "Who then is the faithful and wise manager, whom his master will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the proper time?
43 Blessed is that servant whom his master will find doing these things when he comes.
44 Truly, I say to you, he will set him over all his possessions.
45 But if that servant says to himself, ‘My master is delayed in coming,’ and begins to beat the male and female servants, and to eat and drink and get drunk,
46 the master of that servant will come on a day when he does not expect him and at an hour he does not know, and will cut him in pieces and put him with the unfaithful.
47 And that servant who knew his master’s will but did not get ready or act according to his will, will receive a severe beating.
48 But the one who did not know, and did what deserves punishment, will receive a ligher punishment. From everyone who has been given much, much will be required, and from him to whom they entrusted much, they will demand more.


49 I came to cast fire on the earth, and would that it were already kindled!
50 I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how great is my distress until it is accomplished!
51 Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division.
52 For from now on in one house there will be five divided, three against two and two against three.
53 They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law."


54 He also said to the crowds, "When you see a cloud rising in the west, you say at once, ‘A shower is coming.’ And so it happens.
55 And when you see the south wind blowing, you say, ‘There will be scorching heat,’ and it happens.
56 You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of earth and sky, but why do you not know how to interpret the present time?


57 And why do you not judge for yourselves what is right?
58 As you go with your accuser before the magistrate, make an effort to settle with him on the way, lest he drag you to the judge, and the judge hand you over to the officer, and the officer put you in prison.
59 I tell you, you will never get out until you have paid the very last penny."




Chapter 13


1 Now at that very time, some were present who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
2 And answering, he said to them, "Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans because they suffered these things?
3 No, I tell you, but unless you repent, you will all perish in a similar manner.
4 Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them, do you think that they were worse sinners than all the other men living in Jerusalem?
5 No, I tell you, but unless you repent, you will all perish like they did."


6 And he told this parable: "A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none.
7 So he said to the gardener, 'Look, for three years I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree and find none. Cut it down! Why should it take up space in the garden?'
8 But he answered and said to him, 'Sir, leave it alone this year too, until I dig around it and put on manure.
9 And if it bears fruit next year, fine; but if not, you can cut it down.'"


10 Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath.
11 And behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity for eighteen years, and she was bent over and could not straighten up at all.
12 When Jesus saw her, he called her over and said to her, "Woman, you are released from your infirmity."
13 And he laid his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and she glorified God.
14 But the synagogue leader, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, responded and said to the crowd, "There are six days in which work ought to be done; come on those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day."
15 Then the Lord answered him and said, "Hypocrites! Does not each one of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or donkey from the manger and lead it away to water it?
16 And this woman, a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound for eighteen years, ought she not to have been released from this bond on the Sabbath day?"
17 And as he said these things, all his adversaries were put to shame, and all the crowd rejoiced at all the glorious things being done by him.


18 Therefore, he said, "What is the kingdom of God like, and to what shall I compare it?
19 It is like a mustard seed that a man took and threw into his garden, and it grew and became a tree, and the birds of the air nested in its branches."


20 And again he said, "To what shall I compare the kingdom of God?
21 It is like leaven that a woman took and mixed into three measures of flour until it was all leavened."


22 And he journeyed through towns and villages, teaching and making his way toward Jerusalem.
23 And someone said to him, "Lord, are there few who are being saved?" And he said to them,
24 "Strive to enter through the narrow door, for many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able.
25 Once the master of the house has risen and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and knock at the door, saying, 'Lord, open to us,' then he will answer and say to you, 'I do not know where you come from.'
26 Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.'
27 And he will say, 'I tell you, I do not know where you come from. Depart from me, all you practitioners of unrighteousness.'
28 There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, but you yourselves thrown out.
29 And they will come from east and west, and from north and south, and recline at table in the kingdom of God.
30 And behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last."


31 At that very hour, some Pharisees came up, saying to him, "Get out and escape from here, for Herod wants to kill you."
32 And he said to them, "Go and tell that fox, 'Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I finish my course.
33 Nevertheless, I must journey today and tomorrow and the day following, for it cannot be that a prophet would perish outside of Jerusalem.'
34 Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing!
35 Behold, your house is left to you desolate. And I tell you, you will not see me until the time comes when you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!'"




Chapter 14


1 Now it happened that Jesus went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, and they were watching him closely.
2 And behold, there was a certain man before him who had severe edema.
3 And Jesus, responding, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath, or not?”
4 But they remained silent. And taking hold of him, he healed him and sent him away.
5 And he said to them, “Which of you, if his son or ox falls into a pit, will not immediately pull him out on the Sabbath day?”
6 And they were unable to respond to this.


7 Then he began to tell a parable to those who had been invited, noticing how they were choosing the places of honor, saying to them,
8 “When you are invited by someone to a wedding feast, do not sit down in the place of honor, lest someone more distinguished than you has been invited by him,
9 and the one who invited you both comes and says to you, ‘Give this man your place,’ and then in shame you begin to take the lowest place.
10 But when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that when the one who invited you comes, he may say to you, ‘Friend, move up higher.’ Then you will have honor in the presence of all those reclining with you.
11 For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and he who humbles himself will be exalted.”


12 Then he also said to the one who had invited him, “When you give a luncheon or a dinner, do not call your friends or your brothers or your relatives or rich neighbors, lest they also invite you in return, and you already receive your payback.
13 Instead, when you give a reception, invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind,
14 and you will be blessed, because they do not have the means to repay you; for it will be repaid to you at the resurrection of the righteous.”


15 Now when one of those reclining with him heard these things, he said to him, “Blessed is he who will eat bread in the kingdom of God!”
16 But he said to him, “A certain man was preparing a great banquet and invited many,
17 and at the time of the banquet he sent his servant to say to those who had been invited, ‘Come, for everything is now ready.’
18 But they all alike began to make excuses. The first said to him, ‘I have bought a field, and I must go out and see it; I beg of you to excuse me.’
19 And another said, ‘I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I am going to test them; I beg of you to excuse me.’
20 And another said, ‘I have married a wife, and because of this I cannot come.’
21 And the servant came and reported these things to his master. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, ‘Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and invite the poor and crippled and blind and lame.’
22 And the servant said, ‘Master, what you commanded has been done, and still there is room.’
23 And the master said to the servant, ‘Go out into the highways and hedges and compel more to come in, so that my house may be filled.
24 For I say to you that none of those men who were invited will taste my banquet.’”


25 Now great crowds were following him, and turning, he said to them,
26 “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple.
27 Whoever does not carry his own cross and come after me cannot be my disciple.
28 For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and calculate the cost, whether he has enough to complete it?
29 Otherwise, when he has laid a foundation and is not able to finish, all who see it begin to mock him,
30 saying, ‘This man began to build and was not able to finish.’
31 Or what king, going out to encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and deliberate whether he is able with ten thousand to meet the one coming against him with twenty thousand?
32 And if not, while the other is still far off, he sends a delegation and asks for terms of peace.
33 So therefore, any one of you who does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple.


34 Salt is good, but if salt has lost its taste, how shall its saltiness be restored?
35 It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile; it is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”




Chapter 15


1 Now all the tax collectors and sinners were drawing near to him to hear him.
2 And the Pharisees and the scribes were grumbling, saying, "This man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
3 So he told them this parable, saying,
4 "What man among you, having a hundred sheep and losing one of them, does not leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness and go after the one that is lost until he finds it?
5 And when he finds it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
6 And when he comes home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost.'
7 I tell you that in the same way there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous men who have no need of repentance.


8 Or what woman, having ten silver coins, if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek diligently until she finds it?
9 And when she finds it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I lost.'
10 In the same way, I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents."


11 And he said, "A certain man had two sons.
12 And the younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me the share of the property that falls to me.' And he divided his livelihood between them.
13 And not many days later, the younger son gathered everything together and journeyed to a distant country, and there he squandered his means on reckless living.
14 And when he had spent everything, a severe famine arose in that country, and he began to be in need.
15 So he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to feed pigs.
16 And he was longing to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, and no one gave him anything.
17 But when he came to himself, he said, 'How many of my father’s hired servants have bread enough and to spare, and I am perishing here with hunger!
18 I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you.
19 I am no longer worthy to be called your son; make me like one of your hired servants."'


20 And he arose and went to his father. But while he was still far off, his father saw him and felt compassion, and ran and embraced him and kissed him.
21 And the son said to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.'
22 But the father said to his servants, 'Bring quickly the best robe and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet.
23 And bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat and celebrate.
24 For this my son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.' And they began to celebrate.


25 Now his older son was in the field, and as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
26 And he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant.
27 And he said to him, 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has received him back safe and sound.'
28 But he was angry and refused to go in. His father came out and entreated him,
29 but he answered his father, 'Look, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed your command, yet you never gave me a young goat that I might celebrate with my friends.
30 But when this son of yours came, who has devoured your livelihood with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!'
31 And he said to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours.
32 It was fitting to celebrate and be glad, for this, your brother, was dead and is alive; he was lost and is found.'"




Chapter 16


1 And he was also saying to the disciples, “There was a certain rich man who had a steward, and this steward was accused before him of squandering his possessions.
2 And calling him, he said to him, ‘What is this I hear about you? Give an account of your stewardship, for you can no longer be my steward.’
3 And the steward said to himself, ‘What shall I do, since my master is taking the stewardship away from me? I am not strong enough to dig; I am ashamed to beg.
4 I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the stewardship, others might welcome me into their houses.’
5 And summoning each one of his master’s debtors, he was saying to the first, ‘How much do you owe my master?’
6 And he said, ‘A hundred measures of oil.’ And he said to him, ‘Take your bill, sit down quickly, and write fifty.’
7 Then to another he said, ‘And you, how much do you owe?’ And he said, ‘A hundred measures of wheat.’ He says to him, ‘Take your bill and write eighty.’
8 And the master praised the unrighteous steward because he acted shrewdly, for the sons of this age are more prudent than the sons of light in dealing with their own generation.
9 And I say to you, make friends for yourselves by means of unrighteous wealth, so that when it fails, they may receive you into the eternal dwellings.


10 He who is faithful in very little is faithful also in much, and he who is unrighteous in very little is unrighteous also in much.
11 If, therefore, you have not been faithful with the unrighteous wealth, who will entrust to you the true riches?
12 And if you have not been faithful with what belongs to another, who will give you what is your own?
13 No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will be devoted to the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and wealth.”


14 Now the Pharisees, who were lovers of money, were listening to all these things and were scoffing at him.
15 And he said to them, “You are those who justify yourselves before men, but God knows your hearts; for what is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
16 The Law and the Prophets lasted until John; from then on, the kingdom of God is being proclaimed, and every man is striving to enter into it.
17 But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one stroke of the Law to fail.


18 Every man who divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery, and he who marries a woman divorced from her husband commits adultery.


19 Now there was a certain rich man, and he was dressing in purple and fine linen, enjoying himself splendidly every day.
20 And a certain poor man named Lazarus was laid at his gate, covered with sores,
21 and longing to be fed with the crumbs falling from the rich man’s table; even the dogs were coming and licking his sores.
22 And it happened that the poor man died and was carried away by the angels to Abraham’s bosom; and the rich man also died and was buried.
23 And in Hades, lifting up his eyes, being in torment, he sees Abraham far off and Lazarus in his bosom.
24 And crying out, he said, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this flame.’
25 But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you received your good things during your lifetime, and Lazarus likewise the bad things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish.
26 And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, so that those who want to cross from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross from there to us.’
27 And he said, ‘Then I beg you, father, that you send him to my father’s house—
28 for I have five brothers—so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.’
29 But Abraham says, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them listen to them.’
30 And he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.’
31 And he said to him, ‘If they do not listen to Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded even if someone could rise from the dead.’”




Chapter 17


1 Now he said to his disciples, “It’s inevitable that stumbling blocks will come, but woe to the one through whom they come!
2 It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were thrown into the sea than for him to cause one of these little ones to stumble.
3 Watch yourselves! If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
4 And if he sins against you seven times in a day and turns back to you seven times, saying, ‘I repent,’ you must forgive him.”


5 The apostles said to the Lord, “Increase our faith!”
6 And the Lord said, “If you had faith like a mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree, ‘Be uprooted and planted in the sea,’ and it would obey you.


7 Which one of you, having a servant plowing or tending sheep, would say to him when he comes in from the field, ‘Come at once and sit down to eat’?
8 Wouldn’t you rather say to him, ‘Prepare something for me to eat, and get yourself ready and serve me until I’ve eaten and drunk, and afterward you can eat and drink’?
9 Does he thank the servant because he did what was commanded?
10 So you too, when you’ve done everything commanded of you, say, ‘We are unworthy servants; we’ve only done what we were supposed to do.’”


11 And it happened that as he was traveling to Jerusalem, he was passing between Samaria and Galilee.
12 As he entered a certain village, ten men with leprosy met him, who stood at a distance.
13 They raised their voices, saying, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!”
14 When he saw them, he said to them, “Go and show yourselves to the priests.” And as they went, they were cleansed.
15 One of them, seeing that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
16 He fell on his face at his feet, giving him thanks—and this man was a Samaritan.
17 Jesus responded, saying, “Weren’t ten cleansed? Where are the nine?
18 Was no one found to return and give glory to God except this foreigner?”
19 And he said to him, “Stand up and go; your faith has saved you.”


20 Being asked by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God would come, he answered them, “The kingdom of God doesn’t come with observation,
21 nor will they say, ‘Look, here it is!’ or ‘There it is!’ For behold, the kingdom of God is among you.”


22 Then he said to the disciples, “The days will come when you’ll long to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you won’t see it.
23 They’ll say to you, ‘Look there!’ or ‘Look here!’ Don’t go off or chase after them.
24 For just as lightning flashes from one part of the sky and shines to the other, so will the Son of Man be in his day.
25 But first, he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
26 And just as it was in the days of Noah, so it will be in the days of the Son of Man:
27 they were eating, drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage until the day Noah entered the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all.
28 Likewise, just as it was in the days of Lot—they were eating, drinking, buying, selling, planting, building—
29 but on the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulfur rained from heaven and destroyed them all.
30 It will be the same way on the day the Son of Man is revealed.


31 On that day, let the man on the housetop, with his goods in the house, not come down to take them away, and likewise let the man in the field not turn back.
32 Remember Lot’s wife.
33 Whoever seeks to save his life will lose it, but whoever loses it will preserve it.
34 I tell you, on that night there will be two men in one bed—one will be taken, and the other will be left.
35 Two women will be grinding together—one will be taken, and the other will be left.”
36 []
37 They answered and said to him, “Where, Lord?” And he said to them, “Where the body is, there the eagles will be gathered together.”




Chapter 18


1 And he told them a parable to show that they ought always to pray and not lose heart.
2 He said, “In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man.
3 And there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’
4 For a while he refused, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect man,
5 yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will give her justice, so that she will not wear me out by her continual coming.’”
6 And the Lord said, “Hear what the unrighteous judge says.
7 And will not God give justice to his elect, who cry to him day and night? Will he delay long over them?
8 I tell you, he will give justice to them speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?”


9 He also told this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and despised others:
10 “Two men went up into the temple to pray, one a Pharisee and the other a tax collector.
11 The Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed thus: ‘God, I thank you that I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
12 I fast twice a week; I give tithes of all that I get.’
13 But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner!’
14 I tell you, this man went down to his house justified, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.”


15 Now they were bringing even infants to him, that he might touch them. And when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.
16 But Jesus called them to him, saying, “Let the children come to me, and do not hinder them, for to such belongs the kingdom of God.
17 Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it.”


18 And a ruler asked him, “Good Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?”
19 And Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone.
20 You know the commandments: ‘Do not commit adultery, Do not murder, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor your father and mother.’”
21 And he said, “All these I have kept from my youth.”
22 When Jesus heard this, he said to him, “One thing you still lack. Sell all that you have and distribute to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.”
23 But when he heard these things, he became very sad, for he was extremely rich.
24 Jesus, seeing that he had become sad, said, “How difficult it is for those who have wealth to enter the kingdom of God!
25 For it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the kingdom of God.”
26 Those who heard it said, “Then who can be saved?”
27 But he said, “What is impossible with man is possible with God.”
28 And Peter said, “See, we have left our homes and followed you.”
29 And he said to them, “Truly, I say to you, there is no one who has left house or wife or brothers or parents or children, for the sake of the kingdom of God,
30 who will not receive many times more in this time, and in the age to come eternal life.”


31 And taking the twelve, he said to them, “See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and everything that is written about the Son of Man by the prophets will be accomplished.
32 For he will be delivered over to the Gentiles and will be mocked and shamefully treated and spit upon.
33 And after flogging him, they will kill him, and on the third day he will rise.”
34 But they understood none of these things. This saying was hidden from them, and they did not grasp what was said.


35 As he drew near to Jericho, a blind man was sitting by the roadside begging.
36 And hearing a crowd going by, he inquired what this meant.
37 They told him, “Jesus of Nazareth is passing by.”
38 And he cried out, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!”
39 And those who were in front rebuked him, telling him to be silent. But he cried out all the more, “Son of David, have mercy on me!”
40 And Jesus stopped and commanded him to be brought to him. And when he came near, he asked him,
41 “What do you want me to do for you?” He said, “Lord, let me recover my sight.”
42 And Jesus said to him, “Recover your sight; your faith has made you well.”
43 And immediately he recovered his sight and followed him, glorifying God. And all the men, when they saw it, gave praise to God.




Chapter 19


1 As he entered Jericho and was passing through,
2 a man named Zacchaeus was there. He was a chief tax collector and was rich.
3 He was trying to see who Jesus was, but he couldn’t because of the crowd, since he was short in stature.
4 So he ran ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, because Jesus was about to pass that direction.
5 When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and said to him, "Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for I must stay at your house today."
6 So he hurried down and welcomed him joyfully.
7 When they saw it, all the men grumbled, saying, "He has gone to stay with a sinful man."
8 But Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, "Look, Lord, I am giving half of my possessions to the poor, and if I have cheated anyone out of anything, I am paying it back four times over."
9 Jesus said to him, "Today salvation has come to this house, because this man is also a son of Abraham.
10 For the Son of Man came to seek and to save the lost."


11 While they were listening to these things, he went on to tell a parable, because he was near Jerusalem and they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear immediately.
12 So he said, "A nobleman went into a distant country to receive a kingdom for himself and then return.
13 He called ten of his servants, gave them ten minas, and said to them, 'Do business with these until I come back.'
14 But his citizens hated him and sent a delegation after him, saying, 'We do not want this man to reign over us.' 
15 When he returned, having received the kingdom, he ordered those servants to whom he had given the money to be called to him, so he could find out what they had gained by doing business.
16 The first came forward and said, 'Lord, your mina has made ten more minas.'
17 He said to him, 'Well done, good servant! Because you were faithful in a very small matter, take charge over ten cities.'
18 The second came and said, 'Lord, your mina has made five minas.'
19 He said to him also, 'And you, be over five cities.'
20 Another came, saying, 'Lord, here is your mina, which I kept stored away in a cloth.
21 For I was afraid of you, because you are a strict man. You take what you did not deposit and reap what you did not sow.'
22 He said to him, 'I will judge you by your own words, you wicked servant. You knew that I am a strict man, taking what I did not deposit and reaping what I did not sow?
23 Why then did you not put my money in the bank, so that when I returned I might have collected it with interest?'
24 And he said to those standing by, 'Take the mina from him and give it to the one who has the ten minas.'
25 They said to him, 'Lord, he already has ten minas!'
26 'I tell you,' he replied, 'to everyone who has, more will be given, but from the one who does not have, even what he has will be taken away.
27 But as for these enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them, bring them here and slaughter them in front of me.'"


28 After saying these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
29 When he drew near to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount called Olivet, he sent two of the disciples,
30 saying, "Go into the village ahead of you, and as you enter, you will find a colt tied there, on which no man has ever sat. Untie it and bring it here.
31 If anyone asks you, 'Why are you untying it?' say this: 'The Lord needs it.'"
32 Those who were sent went away and found it just as he had told them.
33 As they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, "Why are you untying the colt?"
34 They said, "The Lord needs it."
35 They brought it to Jesus, threw their garments on the colt, and set Jesus on it.
36 As he went along, men spread their garments on the road.


37 As he was drawing near, already at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works they had seen,
38 saying, "Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!"
39 Some of the Pharisees from the crowd said to him, "Teacher, rebuke your disciples."
40 He answered, "I tell you, if these men are silent, the stones will cry out."


41 When he drew near and saw the city, he wept over it,
42 saying, "If you had known, even you, on this day, the things that make for peace! But now they are hidden from your eyes.
43 For the days will come upon you when your enemies will build a barricade around you and surround you and press you in on every side.
44 They will dash you to the ground, and your children within you, and they will not leave one stone upon another in you, because you did not recognize the time of your visitation."


45 He entered the temple and began to drive out those who were selling,
46 saying to them, "It is written, 'My house shall be a house of prayer,' but you have made it a den of robbers."
47 He was teaching daily in the temple. The chief priests and the scribes and the leading men of the people were seeking to destroy him,
48 but they could not find anything they might do, for all the men were hanging on his words.




Chapter 20


1 One day, as Jesus was teaching the crowd in the temple and proclaiming the good news, the chief priests and the scribes, along with the elders, approached him.
2 They said to him, “Tell us by what authority you are doing these things, or who it is that gave you this authority.”
3 He answered them, “I will also ask you a question. Tell me:
4 The baptism of John—was it from heaven, or from man?”
5 They discussed it among themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will say, ‘Why didn’t you believe him?’
6 But if we say, ‘From man,’ all the crowd will stone us, because they are convinced that John was a prophet.”
7 So they answered that they did not know where it came from.
8 And Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I am doing these things.”


9 He began to tell the crowd this parable: “A man planted a vineyard, leased it to tenants, and went away for a long time.
10 At the proper time, he sent a servant to the tenants so they would give him some of the vineyard’s fruit. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.
11 He sent another servant, but they beat him too, treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed.
12 He sent a third, and they wounded him and threw him out.
13 Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’
14 But when the tenants saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him, so the inheritance will be ours.’
15 So they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them?
16 He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.” When they heard this, they said, “May it never be!”
17 But he looked at them and said, “What then is this that is written: ‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?
18 Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.”


19 The scribes and the chief priests sought to lay hands on him at that very hour, for they knew he had spoken this parable against them, but they feared the crowd.
20 So they watched him closely and sent spies who pretended to be righteous, hoping to catch him in something he said, so they could hand him over to the governor’s authority and jurisdiction.
21 They asked him, “Teacher, we know that you speak and teach rightly, and you do not show partiality, but teach the way of God in truth.
22 Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?”
23 But he perceived their craftiness and said to them,
24 “Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription does it have?” They said, “Caesar’s.”
25 He said to them, “Then render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”
26 They were unable to trap him in what he said in front of the crowd, and marveling at his answer, they fell silent.


27 Some of the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection, came to him and questioned him,
28 saying, “Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man’s brother dies, leaving a wife but no children, the man must take the widow and raise up offspring for his brother.
29 Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife and died childless.
30 The second
31 and the third took her, and likewise all seven left no children and died.
32 Afterward, the woman also died.
33 In the resurrection, therefore, whose wife will she be? For all seven had her as a wife.”
34 Jesus said to them, “The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage,
35 but those who are considered worthy to attain that age and the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage,
36 for they cannot die anymore, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
37 But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.
38 Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him.”
39 Some of the scribes answered, “Teacher, you have spoken well.”
40 For they no longer dared to ask him any question.


41 But he said to them, “How can they say that the Christ is David’s son?
42 For David himself says in the Book of Psalms, ‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand,
43 until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.”’
44 David thus calls him Lord, so how is he his son?”


45 In the hearing of all the crowd, he said to his disciples,
46 “Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes and love greetings in the marketplaces and the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at feasts,
47 who devour widows’ houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive the greater condemnation.”




Chapter 21


1 As Jesus looked up, he saw the rich putting their gifts into the treasury,
2 and he also saw a poor widow putting in two small copper coins.
3 He said, "Truly I tell you, this poor widow has put in more than all of them,
4 for they all contributed out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty put in all she had to live on."


5 While some were speaking about the temple, how it was adorned with beautiful stones and offerings, he said,
6 "As for these things that you see, the days will come when not one stone will be left upon another; all will be thrown down."
7 They asked him, "Teacher, when will these things happen, and what will be the sign when these things are about to take place?"
8 He replied, "Watch out that you are not deceived, for many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and, 'The time is near.' Do not follow them.
9 When you hear of wars and uprisings, do not be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end will not come immediately."


10 Then he said to them, "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
11 There will be great earthquakes, and in various places famines and plagues; there will be fearful sights and great signs from heaven.
12 But before all this, they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors because of my name.
13 This will be your opportunity to bear witness.
14 Settle it in your hearts, therefore, not to prepare beforehand how to defend yourselves,
15 for I will give you a mouth and wisdom that none of your adversaries will be able to withstand or contradict.
16 You will be betrayed even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends, and they will put some of you to death.
17 You will be hated by all men because of my name,
18 but not a hair of your head will perish.
19 By your endurance you will gain your lives."


20 "When you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation has come near.
21 Then let those in Judea flee to the mountains, let those in the city depart, and let not those in the country enter it,
22 for these are days of vengeance, to fulfill all that is written.
23 Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who are nursing infants in those days, for there will be great distress upon the land and wrath against this people.
24 They will fall by the edge of the sword and be led captive among all nations, and Jerusalem will be trampled underfoot by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled."


25 "There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars, and on the earth distress of nations in perplexity because of the roaring of the sea and the waves,
26 men fainting from fear and the expectation of what is coming on the inhabited world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
27 Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
28 When these things begin to happen, stand up and lift up your heads, because your redemption is drawing near."


29 He told them a parable: "Look at the fig tree and all the trees.
30 When they are already budding, you see for yourselves and know that summer is near.
31 So also, when you see these things happening, know that the kingdom of God is near.
32 Truly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all has taken place.
33 Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away."


34 "Be on guard, lest your hearts be weighed down with dissipation, drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and that day come upon you suddenly like a trap,
35 for it will come upon all who dwell on the face of the whole earth.
36 But stay awake at all times, praying that you may have strength to escape all these things that are going to take place and to stand before the Son of Man."


37 During the day he was teaching in the temple, but at night he went out and lodged on the mount called Olivet.
38 And early in the morning all the men came to him in the temple to hear him.




Chapter 22


1 Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread, which is called the Passover, was drawing near.
2 The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a way to put him to death, because they feared the crowd.


3 Then Satan entered into Judas, the one called Iscariot, who was one of the Twelve.
4 He went away and discussed with the chief priests and officers how he might betray him to them.
5 They were delighted and agreed to give him silver.
6 He consented and began seeking an opportunity to betray him to them away from the crowd.


7 The day of Unleavened Bread came, on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed.
8 Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, "Go and prepare the Passover for us, so that we may eat it."
9 They said to him, "Where do you want us to prepare it?"
10 He said to them, "Look, when you enter the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house he enters.
11 Say to the owner of the house, 'The Teacher says to you, "Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?"'
12 He will show you a large furnished upper room. Prepare it there."
13 They went and found everything just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.


14 When the hour came, he reclined at the table, and the apostles with him.
15 He said to them, "I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer.
16 For I tell you, I will not never again eat it until its fulfillment in the kingdom of God."
17 Taking a cup, he gave thanks and said, "Take this and divide it among yourselves.
18 For I tell you, from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes."
19 Taking bread, he gave thanks, broke it, and gave it to them, saying, "This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me."
20 Likewise, he took the cup after they had eaten, saying, "This cup, poured out for you, is the new covenant in my blood.
21 But look, the hand of the one betraying me is with me on the table.
22 For the Son of Man will die as it has been determined, but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!"
23 They began to question among themselves which of them it could be who was going to do this.


24 A dispute also arose among them about which of them was considered the greatest.
25 He said to them, "The kings of the Gentiles lord it over them, and those who have authority over them are called benefactors.
26 But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become like the youngest, and the leader like the one who serves.
27 For who is greater, the one who reclines at the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines? But I am among you as the one who serves.
28 You are those who have remained with me in my trials.
29 I confer on you a kingdom, just as my Father conferred one on me,
30 so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.


31 "Simon, Simon, look, Satan has demanded to sift all of you like wheat.
32 But I have prayed for you, that your faith may not fail. And that when you have turned yourself back around, you may strengthen your brothers."
33 He said to him, "Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death."
34 He said, "I tell you, Peter, a rooster will not crow today until you have denied three times that you know me."


35 He said to them, "When I sent you out without a moneybag, a knapsack, or sandals, did you lack anything?" They said, "Nothing."
36 He said to them, "But now, let the one who has a moneybag take it, and likewise a knapsack. And let the one who has no sword sell his cloak and buy one.
37 For I tell you that this scripture must be fulfilled in me: 'And he was numbered with the transgressors.' For what is written about me is reaching its fulfillment."
38 They said, "Lord, look, here are two swords." He said to them, "It is enough."


39 Going out, he went, as was his custom, to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples followed him.
40 When he arrived at the place, he said to them, "Pray that you may not enter into temptation."
41 He withdrew from them about a stone's throw, knelt down, and began to pray,
42 saying, "Father, if you are willing, take this cup away from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done."
43 An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
44 Being in agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat became like great drops of blood falling to the ground.
45 Rising from prayer, he came to the disciples and found them sleeping from sorrow.
46 He said to them, "Why are you sleeping? Get up and pray that you may not enter into temptation."


47 While he was still speaking, look, a crowd came, and the one called Judas, one of the Twelve, was leading them. He approached Jesus to kiss him.
48 But Jesus said to him, "Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?"
49 When those around him saw what was about to happen, they said, "Lord, shall we strike with the sword?"
50 One of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear.
51 But Jesus responded, "Stop! No more of this!" And he touched his ear and healed him.
52 Jesus said to the chief priests, officers of the temple, and elders who had come against him, "Have you come out with swords and clubs as against a robber?
53 When I was with you every day in the temple, you did not stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness."


54 Seizing him, they led him away and brought him into the high priest's house while Peter was following at a distance.
55 When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat among them.
56 A servant girl, seeing him sitting in the light, looked closely at him, and said, "This man was with him too."
57 But he denied it, saying, "Woman, I do not know him."
58 A little later, someone else saw him and said, "You are one of them too." But Peter said, "Man, I am not."
59 After about an hour had passed, another man insisted, saying, "Certainly this man was with him, for he is a Galilean too."
60 But Peter said, "Man, I do not know what you are talking about." Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed.
61 Then the Lord turned and looked at Peter, who remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said to him, "Before a rooster crows today, you will deny me three times."
62 And he went out and wept bitterly.


63 The men who were holding Jesus began mocking and beating him.
64 They blindfolded him and kept asking, "Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?"
65 They were saying many other things against him, blaspheming.


66 When day came, the council of the elders of the people gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him into their council, saying,
67 "If you are the Christ, tell us." But he said to them, "If I tell you, you will not believe,
68 and if I ask you, you will not answer.
69 But from now on the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God."
70 They all said, "Are you the Son of God, then?" He said to them, "You say that I am."
71 They said, "What further testimony do we need? For we have heard it for ourselves from his own mouth."




Chapter 23


1 Now the whole assembly rose up and led him to Pilate.
2 They began to accuse him, saying, "We found this man subverting our nation, opposing the payment of taxes to Caesar, and claiming that he himself is Christ, a king."
3 Pilate asked him, "Are you the king of the Jews?" He answered him, "You say so."
4 Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, "I find no guilt in this man."
5 But they insisted, saying, "He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, from Galilee even to this place."


6 When Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilean.
7 Upon learning that he belonged to Herod’s jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem at that time.
8 When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had long desired to see him because he had heard about him and was hoping to see some sign performed by him.
9 He questioned him at length, but he gave him no answer.
10 The chief priests and the scribes stood by, vehemently accusing him.
11 Herod, along with his soldiers, treated him with contempt and mocked him. After dressing him in splendid clothing, he sent him back to Pilate.
12 That very day Herod and Pilate became friends with each other, for previously  they had been enemies.


13 Pilate called together the chief priests, the rulers, and the people,
14 and said to them, "You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people, and after examining him before you, I found no guilt in him regarding the charges you bring against him.
15 Neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us. Look, nothing deserving death has been done by him.
16 I will therefore punish him and release him."
17 []
18 But they all cried out together, "Away with this man, and release to us Barabbas"—
19 a man who had been thrown into prison for an insurrection started in the city and for murder.
20 Pilate addressed them again, wanting to release Jesus,
21 but they kept shouting, "Crucify, crucify him!"
22 A third time he said to them, "Why? What evil has he done? I have found in him no guilt deserving death. I will therefore punish him and release him."
23 But they were urgent, demanding with loud voices that he be crucified, and their voices prevailed.


24 Pilate decided that their demand should be granted.
25 He released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, whom they asked for, but he delivered Jesus over to them.
26 As they led him away, they seized a man named Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country, and laid the cross on him to carry it behind Jesus.
27 A large crowd of the people followed him, including women who were mourning and lamenting for him.
28 But turning to them, Jesus said, "Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children.
29 For behold, the days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.’
30 Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us,’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us.’
31 For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?"


32 Two others, who were criminals, were led away to be put to death with him.
33 Then they came to the place called the Skull, and crucified him there with the criminals, one on his right and one on his left.
34 Jesus said, "Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they are doing." And they cast lots to divide his garments.
35 The people stood watching, and the rulers scoffed at him, saying, "He saved others; let him save himself if he is the Christ of God, his Chosen One!"
36 The soldiers also mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine
37 and saying, "If you are the king of the Jews, save yourself!"
38 There was also an inscription over him: "This is the king of the Jews."


39 One of the criminals who were hanged railed at him, saying, "Are you not the Christ? Save yourself and us!"
40 But the other rebuked him, saying, "Do you not fear God, since you are under the same sentence of condemnation?
41 We indeed are justly condemned, for we are receiving the due reward of our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong."
42 Then he said, "Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom."
43 He said to him, "Today I tell you the truth, you will be with me in paradise."


44 It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour,
45 for the sun’s light failed. The curtain of the temple was torn in two.
46 Jesus, crying out with a loud voice, said, "Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!" Having said this, he breathed his last.
47 When the centurion saw what had taken place, he glorified God, saying, "Certainly this man was righteous."
48 All the crowds that had assembled for this spectacle, when they saw what had happened, returned home beating their breasts.
49 All his acquaintances and the women who had followed him from Galilee stood at a distance watching these things.


50 Now there was a man named Joseph, from the Jewish town of Arimathea, a member of the council, a good and righteous man,
51 who had not consented to their decision and action. He was waiting for the kingdom of God.
52 This man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
53 Then he took it down, wrapped it in a linen shroud, and laid him in a tomb cut in stone, where no one had yet been buried.
54 It was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was beginning.
55 The women who had come with him from Galilee followed and saw the tomb and how his body was laid.
56 Then they returned and prepared spices and ointments. On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.




Chapter 24


1 Now on the first day of the week, very early in the morning, the women came to the tomb, bringing the spices they had prepared.
2 They found the stone rolled away from the tomb,
3 and when they entered, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
4 While they were perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling garments.
5 The women were frightened and bowed their faces to the ground, but the men said to them, "Why do you seek the living among the dead?
6 He is not here, but he has risen. Remember how he told you, while he was still in Galilee,
7 that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, be crucified, and on the third day rise again?"
8 And they remembered his words.


9 Returning from the tomb, they reported all these things to the eleven and to all the rest.
10 Now it was Mary Magdalene, Joanna, Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them who told these things to the apostles.
11 But these words seemed to them like nonsense, and they did not believe them.
12 But Peter rose and ran to the tomb, and stooping to look in, he saw only the linen cloths. He went away to his home, wondering about what had happened.


13 Now behold, on that same day, two of them were going to a village named Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem,
14 and they were talking with each other about all these things that had taken place.
15 While they were talking and discussing, Jesus himself drew near and began walking with them,
16 but their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
17 He said to them, "What are these matters you are discussing with each other as you walk?" And they stood still, looking sad.
18 One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, "Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem who does not know the things that have happened there in these days?"
19 He said to them, "What things?" They replied, "The things about Jesus of Nazareth, who was a prophet, mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people,
20 and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
21 But we were hoping that he was the one to redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things happened.
22 Moreover, some women from our group amazed us; they were at the tomb early this morning
23 and did not find his body. They came saying that they had even seen a vision of angels who said he was alive.
24 Some of those who were with us went to the tomb and found it just as the women had said, but they did not see his body."


25 He said to them, "O foolish men and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!
26 Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things and enter into his glory?"
27 And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them the things concerning himself in all the Scriptures.


28 They drew near to the village where they were going, and he acted as though he were going farther.
29 But they urged him, saying, "Stay with us, for it is toward evening, and the day is now far spent." So he went in to stay with them.
30 When he reclined at table with them, he took the bread, blessed it, broke it, and gave it to them.
31 Their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he vanished from their sight.
32 They said to each other, "Were not our hearts burning within us while he spoke to us on the road, while he opened the Scriptures to us?"


33 They rose that same hour and returned to Jerusalem, and they found the eleven gathered together with those who were with them,
34 saying, "The Lord has risen indeed and has appeared to Simon!"
35 Then they recounted what had happened on the road and how he revealed himself to them in the breaking of the bread.


36 While they were saying these things, he himself stood among them and said to them, "Peace to you."
37 But they were startled and frightened, thinking they were seeing a spirit.
38 He said to them, "Why are you troubled, and why do doubts arise in your hearts?
39 Look at my hands and my feet. It is I. Touch me and see, for a spirit would not have flesh and bones as you see I have."
40 And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
41 While they still disbelieved for joy and were marveling, he said to them, "Have you anything here to eat?"
42 They gave him a piece of broiled fish,
43 and he took it and ate it before them.


44 Then he said to them, "These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled."
45 Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures,
46 and he said to them, "Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead,
47 and that repentance for the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
48 You are witnesses of these things.
49 And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon you, but stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high."


50 He led them out as far as Bethany, and lifting up his hands, he blessed them. 
51 While he was blessing them, he parted from them and was carried up into heaven.
52 And they worshiped him and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
53 and they were continually in the temple blessing God.