The Acts of the Apostles


Chapter 1


1 In my first book, Theophilus, I wrote about everything Jesus began to do and teach  
2 until the day He was taken up, after He had given orders through the Holy Spirit to the apostles He had chosen.  
3 After His suffering, He presented Himself alive to them with many convincing proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days and speaking about the kingdom of God.  
4 While He was with them, He commanded them not to leave Jerusalem but to wait for the Father’s promise. “This,” He said, “is what you heard from Me—  
5 for John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit not many days from now.”  


6 So when they had come together, they asked Him, “Lord, are You restoring the kingdom to Israel at this time?”
7 He said to them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has set by His own authority.
8 But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, and you will be My witnesses in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the ends of the earth.”
9 After He had said this, as they were watching, He was lifted up, and a cloud took Him out of their sight.
10 While they were staring into the sky as He was going, suddenly two men in white clothes stood beside them.
11 They said, “Men of Galilee, why do you stand looking up into the sky? This Jesus, who has been taken up from you into heaven, will come in the same way that you saw Him go into heaven.”


12 Then they returned to Jerusalem from the Mount of Olives, which is near the city—a Sabbath day’s journey away.
13 When they arrived, they went up to the upstairs room where they were staying: Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.
14 They were all continually united in prayer, along with the women, Mary the mother of Jesus, and His brothers.


15 During those days Peter stood up among the brothers (there were about 120 gathered together) and said,
16 “Brothers, the Scripture had to be fulfilled that the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand through the mouth of David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus.
17 For he was numbered among us and was allotted a share in this ministry.”
18 (Now this man acquired a field with the reward of his wickedness, and falling headfirst, his body burst open, and all his intestines spilled out.
19 This became known to all the residents of Jerusalem, so that in their own language that field was called Akeldama, that is, ‘Field of Blood.’)
20 “For it is written in the Book of Psalms: ‘Let his dwelling become desolate; let no one live in it,’ and, ‘Let someone else take his position.’


21 Therefore, from among the men who have accompanied us during the whole time the Lord Jesus went in and out among us—
22 beginning from the baptism of John until the day He was taken up from us—one of these must become a witness with us of His resurrection.”
23 So they proposed two: Joseph called Barsabbas (who was also known as Justus) and Matthias.
24 Then they prayed, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show which of these two You have chosen
25 to take the place in this ministry and apostleship, which Judas left to go to his own place.”
26 Then they cast lots for them, and the lot fell to Matthias, so he was added to the eleven apostles.




Chapter 2


1 When the day of Pentecost arrived, they were all together in one place.
2 Suddenly, a sound like a violent rushing wind came from heaven, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting.
3 Divided tongues, like fire, appeared and rested on each one of them.
4 They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other languages as the Spirit gave them the ability.  


5 Now there were Jews staying in Jerusalem, devout men from every nation under heaven.
6 When this sound occurred, a crowd came together and was confused because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
7 They were astounded and said, “Look, aren’t all these who are speaking Galileans?
8 How is it that each of us hears them in our own native language?
9 Parthians, Medes, Elamites—those who live in Mesopotamia, Judea, and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
10 Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya near Cyrene; visitors from Rome,
11 both Jews and converts; Cretans and Arabians—we hear them declaring the mighty works of God in our own tongues!”
12 They were all amazed and puzzled, saying to one another, “What does this mean?”
13 But others mocked and said, “They’re full of new wine.”  


14 Then Peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice, and addressed them: “Men of Judea and all who live in Jerusalem, let this be known to you and listen to my words.
15 These men are not drunk, as you suppose, since it’s only the third hour of the day.
16 On the contrary, this is what was spoken through the prophet Joel:


17 ‘And it will be in the last days, says the Lord,  
that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh.  
Your sons and your daughters will prophesy,  
your young men will see visions,  
and your old men will dream dreams.
18 Even on my male servants and my female servants,  
in those days I will pour out my Spirit,  
and they will prophesy.
19 I will display wonders in the heavens above  
and signs on the earth below,  
blood and fire and a cloud of smoke.
20 The sun will be turned to darkness  
and the moon to blood  
before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.  
21 Then everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.’  


22 “Men of Israel, listen to these words: Jesus of Nazareth was a man attested to you by God with miracles, wonders, and signs that God did among you through him, just as you yourselves know.
23 This man was handed over by God’s determined plan and foreknowledge, and you used lawless men to nail him to a cross and kill him.
24 But God raised him up, ending the pains of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it.
25 For David says about him:  


‘I saw the Lord always before me;  
because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.  
26 Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced.  
Moreover, my flesh will rest in hope,  
27 because you will not abandon my body to the grave
or allow your Holy One to see decay.  
28 You have made known to me the paths of life;  
you will fill me with joy in your presence.’  


29 “Brothers, I can confidently speak to you about the patriarch David: he is both dead and buried, and his tomb is with us to this day.
30 Since he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn an oath to him that one of his descendants would sit on his throne,
31 he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ: He was not abandoned to the grave, and his flesh did not see decay.  


32 “God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of it.
33 Therefore, since he has been exalted to the right hand of God and has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit, he has poured out what you both see and hear.
34 For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says:  


‘The Lord said to my Lord,  
“Sit at my right hand  
35 until I make your enemies  
a footstool for your feet.”’  


36 “Therefore, let all the house of Israel know with certainty that God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ.”  


37 When they heard this, they were pierced to the heart and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, “Brothers, what should we do?”  


38 Peter replied, “Repent and be baptized, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
39 For the promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, as many as the Lord our God will call.”
40 With many other words he testified and urged them, saying, “Be saved from this corrupt generation!”
41 So those who accepted his message were baptized, and that day about three thousand people were added to the believers.


42 They devoted themselves to the apostles’ teaching, to fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and to prayer.


43 A sense of awe came over everyone, and many wonders and signs were being done through the apostles.
44 All the believers were together and held all things in common.
45 They sold their possessions and property and distributed the proceeds to all, as anyone had need.
46 Every day they devoted themselves to meeting together in the temple and broke bread from house to house. They ate their food with glad and sincere hearts,
47 praising God and having favor with all the people. And the Lord added to their number daily those who were being saved.




Chapter 3


1 Now Peter and John were going up to the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
2 And a man who had been lame from birth was being carried there, whom they would lay daily at the temple gate called Beautiful, so that he could ask for alms from those entering the temple.
3 When he saw Peter and John about to enter the temple, he began asking to receive alms.
4 But Peter, looking intently at him along with John, said, “Look at us.”
5 So he fixed his attention on them, expecting to receive something from them.
6 But Peter said, “Silver and gold I do not have, but what I do have, I give to you: In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk.”
7 And taking hold of him by the right hand, he raised him up, and immediately his feet and ankles were strengthened.
8 Leaping up, he stood and began to walk, and he entered the temple with them, walking and leaping and praising God.
9 And all the people saw him walking and praising God,
10 and they recognized that he was the one who used to sit at the Beautiful Gate of the temple to ask for alms, and they were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.  


11 While he was clinging to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them at Solomon’s portico, utterly astonished.
12 When Peter saw this, he responded to the people, “Men of Israel, why are you amazed at this, or why are you staring at us as if by our own power or godliness we had made him walk?
13 The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified His servant Jesus, whom you handed over and rejected before Pilate, even when he had decided to release Him.
14 But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked instead for a murderer to be granted to you.
15 You killed the Author of life, whom God raised from the dead—of which we are witnesses.
16 But because this man, this one whom you see and know, believed in Jesus' name, he has been healed in His name. The faith that is through Jesus has given him this perfect health in the presence of all of you.


17 And now, brothers, I know that you acted in ignorance, just as your rulers did.
18 But what God foretold through the mouth of all the prophets—that His Christ would suffer—He has thus fulfilled.
19 Therefore, repent and turn back, so that your sins may be wiped away,
20 so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord, and that He may send the Christ appointed for you—Jesus—
21 whom heaven must receive until the time of the restoration of all things, which God spoke about through the mouth of His holy prophets long ago.
22 Moses said, ‘The Lord your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers. You must listen to everything He tells you.
23 And it shall be that every soul who does not listen to that prophet shall be completely cut off from the people.’
24 And indeed, all the prophets who have spoken, from Samuel and those after him, also proclaimed these days.  


25 You are the sons of the prophets and of the covenant that God made with your fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘And in your seed all the families of the earth shall be blessed.’
26 God, having raised up His servant, sent Him first to you, to bless you by turning each of you from your wickedness.”




Chapter 4


1 Now as they were speaking to the people, the priests, the captain of the temple guard, and the Sadducees came up to them,
2 greatly annoyed because they were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
3 They seized them and put them in custody until the next day, since it was already evening.
4 But many of those who heard the message believed, and the number of the men grew to about five thousand.  


5 The next day, their rulers, elders, and scribes assembled in Jerusalem,
6 along with Annas the high priest, Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and all who were of the high-priestly family.
7 After placing them in the midst, they began to inquire, “By what power or in what name have you done this?”  


8 Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “Rulers of the people and elders,
9 if we are being examined today about a good deed done to a crippled man—by what means he was healed—
10 let it be known to all of you and to all the people of Israel that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified and whom God raised from the dead, by Him this man stands before you healthy.
11 This Jesus is ‘the stone rejected by you, the builders, which has become the cornerstone.’
12 And there is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved.”  


13 When they saw the boldness of Peter and John and realized that they were uneducated and untrained men, they were astonished and recognized that they had been with Jesus.
14 And seeing the man who had been healed standing with them, they had nothing to say in opposition.
15 So they ordered them to leave the Sanhedrin and conferred among themselves,
16 saying, “What should we do with these men? For it is clear to all who live in Jerusalem that an amazing miracle has been done through them, and we cannot deny it.
17 But to keep it from spreading any further among the people, let us warn them not to speak to anyone in this name again.”  


18 So they summoned them and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus.
19 But Peter and John answered them, “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, you must judge.
20 For we cannot stop speaking about what we have seen and heard.”  


21 After threatening them further, they released them, since they found no way to punish them because of the people, for everyone was glorifying God over what had happened.
22 For the man on whom this sign of healing had been performed was more than forty years old.  


23 After they were released, they went to their own people and reported everything the chief priests and elders had said to them.
24 When they heard this, they raised their voices together to God and said, “Sovereign Lord, You made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them.
25 You spoke through the Holy Spirit by the mouth of our father David, Your servant:  


‘Why did the nations rage  
and the peoples plot futile things?  
26 The kings of the earth took their stand,  
and the rulers assembled together  
against the Lord and against His Christ.’  


27 For truly in this city both Herod and Pontius Pilate, along with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, gathered together against Your holy servant Jesus, whom You anointed,
28 to do whatever Your hand and will had predestined to take place.
29 And now, Lord, look upon their threats and grant that Your servants may speak Your word with all boldness,
30 while You stretch out Your hand to heal, and signs and wonders are performed through the name of Your holy servant Jesus.”  


31 When they had prayed, the place where they were gathered was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak the word of God with boldness.  


32 Now the multitude of believers was of one heart and soul, and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they had everything in common.
33 With great power the apostles were giving testimony to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.
34 For there was not a needy person among them, because all who owned lands or houses sold them,
35 brought the proceeds of what was sold, and laid them at the apostles’ feet, and they were distributed to each as anyone had need.  


36 Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas (which means “Son of Encouragement”),
37 sold a field he owned, brought the money, and laid it at the apostles’ feet.




Chapter 5


1 But a man named Ananias, with his wife Sapphira, sold a piece of property,
2 and with his wife’s knowledge, he kept back part of the proceeds for himself and brought only a portion of it, laying it at the apostles’ feet.
3 But Peter said, “Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back part of the money from the land’s sale?
4 While it remained unsold, wasn’t it yours? And after it was sold, wasn’t the money still under your control? Why have you set this thing in your heart? You haven’t lied to men but to God.”
5 When Ananias heard these words, he collapsed and died. And great fear came upon all who heard about it.
6 The young men got up, wrapped him up, carried him out, and buried him.  


7 About three hours later, his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.
8 Peter asked her, “Tell me, did you sell the land for this amount?” She said, “Yes, for that amount.”
9 Then Peter said to her, “Why did you both agree to test the Spirit of the Lord? Look! The feet of those who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out as well.”
10 Instantly, she fell down at his feet and died. When the young men came in, they found her dead, so they carried her out and buried her beside her husband.
11 And great fear came upon the whole church and upon all who heard about these things.  


12 Many signs and wonders were being done among the people through the hands of the apostles. They were all together in Solomon’s Colonnade.
13 No one else dared to join them, but the people held them in high regard.
14 More and more believers were added to the Lord—multitudes of men and women.
15 As a result, they would carry the sick out into the streets and lay them on cots and mats so that when Peter came by, at least his shadow might fall on some of them.
16 Crowds also came from the towns around Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those tormented by unclean spirits, and they were all healed.  


17 But the high priest rose up, along with all who were with him (that is, the party of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy.
18 They arrested the apostles and put them in the public jail.
19 But during the night, an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors, brought them out, and said,
20 “Go, stand in the temple courts and tell the people all about this life.”
21 When they heard this, they entered the temple at daybreak and began to teach.  


When the high priest and those with him arrived, they called together the Sanhedrin, and the full assembly of the elders of Israel, and sent for the apostles in jail.
22 But when the officers arrived, they did not find them in the prison. So they went back and reported,
23 “We found the jail locked securely and the guards standing at the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside.”
24 When the captain of the temple guard and the chief priests heard this, they were perplexed, wondering what this could mean.
25 Then someone came and reported, “Look! The men you put in jail are standing in the temple and teaching the people.”  


26 Then the captain went with the officers and brought them back, but without force, because they were afraid the people might stone them.
27 After bringing them in, they made them stand before the Sanhedrin, and the high priest questioned them:
28 “Didn’t we strictly command you not to teach in this name? But instead, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching and are determined to bring this man’s blood upon us.”
29 But Peter and the apostles answered, “We must obey God rather than men.
30 The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed by hanging him on a tree.
31 God exalted him to his right hand as Prince and Savior, to give repentance to Israel and the forgiveness of sins.
32 We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.”  


33 When they heard this, they were enraged and wanted to kill them.
34 But a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law respected by all the people, stood up in the Sanhedrin and ordered the men to be taken outside for a little while.
35 Then he said to them, “Men of Israel, be careful what you are about to do to these men.
36 Some time ago, Theudas rose up, claiming to be somebody, and about four hundred men rallied to him. He was killed, and all who followed him were dispersed and came to nothing.
37 After him, Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the census and led people in a revolt. He also perished, and all who followed him were scattered.
38 So in the present case, I tell you, stay away from these men and leave them alone. For if this plan or work is of human origin, it will fail.
39 But if it is from God, you will not be able to stop them. You might even be found fighting against God.”  


40 They were persuaded by him. So they called in the apostles, had them flogged, ordered them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.
41 When they left the presence of the Sanhedrin, they were rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name.
42 Every day, in the temple and from house to house, they never stopped teaching and proclaiming the good news that Jesus is the Christ.




Chapter 6


1 Now in those days, as the disciples were increasing in number, a complaint arose from the Greek-speakers against the Hebrew-speakers because their widows were being overlooked in the daily distribution of food.


2 So the Twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, “It is not right for us to neglect the word of God in order to serve tables.
3 Therefore, brothers, select from among you seven men of good reputation, full of the Spirit and wisdom, whom we will appoint for this duty.
4 But we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the word.”


5 This proposal pleased the whole group, and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a convert from Antioch.
6 They presented them before the apostles, who prayed and laid their hands on them.


7 So the word of God continued to spread, and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem increased greatly, and a large group of priests became obedient to the faith.


8 Now Stephen, full of grace and power, was performing great wonders and signs among the people.
9 But some men from the Synagogue of the Freedmen (as it was called), both Cyrenians and Alexandrians, and some from Cilicia and Asia, rose up and argued with Stephen.
10 Yet they could not stand against the wisdom and the Spirit by whom he spoke.


11 Then they secretly instigated men to say, “We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God.”
12 They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and they rushed upon him, seized him, and brought him before the Sanhedrin.
13 They set up false witnesses who said, “This man never stops speaking against this holy place and the law.
14 For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place and change the customs that Moses handed down to us.”


15 And all who were sitting in the Sanhedrin looked intently at him and saw that his face was like the face of an angel.  




Chapter 7


1 The high priest said, "Are these things so?"


2 Stephen replied, "Brothers and fathers, listen! The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham while he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran,
3 and said to him, 'Leave your country and your relatives and go to the land that I will show you.'
4 Then he left the land of the Chaldeans and settled in Haran. After his father died, God moved him from there to this land where you now live.
5 Yet He gave him no inheritance in it, not even a foot of ground, but He promised to give it to him as a possession, and to his descendants after him, even though he had no child.
6 God said to him that his descendants would live as strangers in a foreign land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years.
7 'But I will judge the nation that they serve as slaves,' God said, 'and afterwards they will come out and worship Me in this place.'
8 Then He gave him the covenant of circumcision, and so Abraham became the father of Isaac and circumcised him on the eighth day. Isaac did the same for Jacob, and Jacob for the twelve patriarchs.


9 The patriarchs, jealous of Joseph, sold him into Egypt, but God was with him
10 and rescued him from all his troubles. He gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt, who appointed him ruler over Egypt and over his whole household.
11 Then a famine came over all Egypt and Canaan, causing great suffering, and our fathers could not find food.
12 But when Jacob heard there was grain in Egypt, he sent our fathers there the first time.
13 On their second visit, Joseph revealed his identity to his brothers, and Pharaoh learned of Joseph’s family.
14 Joseph then sent for his father Jacob and all his relatives, seventy-five persons in all.
15 So Jacob went down to Egypt, and he and our fathers died there.
16 Their bodies were carried back to Shechem and placed in the tomb that Abraham had bought for a sum of silver from the sons of Hamor in Shechem.


17 As the time drew near for God to fulfill the promise He had made to Abraham, the people increased and multiplied in Egypt,
18 until another king arose who knew nothing of Joseph.
19 This king dealt treacherously with our people and oppressed our fathers, forcing them to abandon their infants so they would not survive.
20 At that time, Moses was born, and he was beautiful in God’s sight. He was nurtured in his father’s house for three months.
21 When he was abandoned, Pharaoh’s daughter took him in and raised him as her own son.
22 So Moses was educated in all the wisdom of the Egyptians and was powerful in his words and deeds.


23 When he was forty years old, he decided to visit his brothers, the sons of Israel.
24 Seeing one of them being mistreated, he defended him and avenged him by striking down the Egyptian.
25 He thought his brothers would understand that God was giving them deliverance through him, but they did not understand.
26 The next day he came upon two Israelites fighting and tried to reconcile them. ‘Men,’ he said, ‘you are brothers. Why are you mistreating each other?’
27 But the one mistreating his neighbor pushed him aside and said, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge over us?
28 Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’
29 When Moses heard this, he fled and became an exile in the land of Midian, where he fathered two sons.


30 After forty years had passed, an angel appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in the flame of a burning bush.
31 When Moses saw it, he was amazed at the sight. As he approached to look more closely, the voice of the Lord came:
32 ‘I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.’ Moses trembled and did not dare to look.
33 Then the Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you are standing is holy ground.
34 I have surely seen the oppression of My people in Egypt. I have heard their groaning and have come down to rescue them. Now come, I am sending you to Egypt.’


35 This Moses, whom they rejected, saying, ‘Who appointed you ruler and judge?’—this man God sent as both ruler and deliverer through the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
36 He led them out, performing wonders and signs in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years.
37 This is the Moses who told the Israelites, ‘God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among your brothers.’
38 He was in the assembly in the wilderness, with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers. He received living words to give to us.
39 But our fathers refused to obey him. Instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to Egypt.
40 They said to Aaron, ‘Make us gods who will go before us! As for this Moses who brought us out of Egypt, we don’t know what has happened to him.’
41 They made a calf in those days, offered sacrifices to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
42 But God turned away and handed them over to worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the prophets:


‘Did you bring Me sacrifices and offerings
for forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
43 You took up the tent of Moloch
and the star of your god Rephan,
the images you made to worship.
So I will exile you beyond Babylon.’


44 Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, just as God commanded Moses to make it according to the pattern he had seen.
45 Our fathers received it and brought it in with Joshua when they dispossessed the nations that God drove out before them. It remained until the time of David,
46 who found favor with God and asked to provide a dwelling place for the God of Jacob.
47 But it was Solomon who built Him a house.
48 However, the Most High does not dwell in houses made by human hands, as the prophet says:


49 ‘Heaven is My throne,
and the earth is My footstool.
What kind of house will you build for Me?
says the Lord,
or where will My resting place be?
50 Did not My hand make all these things?’


51 You stiff-necked people with uncircumcised hearts and ears! You always resist the Holy Spirit—just as your fathers did, so do you.
52 Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, whom you have now betrayed and murdered—
53 you who received the Law ordained by angels and yet have not kept it."


54 When they heard these things, they were enraged and gnashed their teeth at him.
55 But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
56 He said, "Look! I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!"


57 But they cried out with a loud voice, covered their ears, and rushed at him together.
58 They threw him out of the city and stoned him. The witnesses laid their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
59 As they were stoning Stephen, he called out, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!"
60 Then he fell to his knees and cried out in a loud voice, "Lord, do not hold this sin against them!" When he had said this, he fell asleep.




Chapter 8


1 Saul fully approved of Stephen’s execution. That day, a severe persecution arose against the church in Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria.
2 Devout men buried Stephen and mourned deeply for him.
3 But Saul was ravaging the church, going from house to house, dragging off men and women, and putting them in prison.


4 Those who were scattered went about preaching the word.
5 Philip went down to a city in Samaria and proclaimed Christ to them.
6 The crowds listened attentively to what Philip said, because they heard and saw the signs he performed.
7 For unclean spirits came out of many who were possessed, crying out with a loud voice, and many who were paralyzed or lame were healed.
8 So there was great joy in that city.


9 Now a man named Simon had practiced sorcery in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, claiming to be someone great.
10 Everyone, from the least to the greatest, paid attention to him and said, “This man is the power of God that is called Great.”
11 They listened to him because he had amazed them with his sorceries for a long time.
12 But when they believed Philip, who was preaching the good news about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
13 Even Simon himself believed, and after he was baptized, he followed Philip closely and was amazed as he observed the signs and great miracles taking place.


14 When the apostles in Jerusalem heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them.
15 When they arrived, they prayed for them to receive the Holy Spirit,
16 because He had not yet fallen on any of them; they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
17 Then Peter and John laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.


18 When Simon saw that the Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money
19 and said, “Give me this authority too, so that everyone I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.”


20 But Peter said to him, “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money!
21 You have no part or share in this matter, because your heart is not right before God.
22 Repent of this wickedness and pray to the Lord that, if possible, the intent of your heart may be forgiven.
23 For I see that you are full of bitter poison and bound by iniquity.”
24 Simon answered, “Pray to the Lord for me so that nothing you have said may happen to me.”


25 After they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, preaching the gospel in many Samaritan villages.


26 Now an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, “Get up and go south to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza.” (This is a desert road.)
27 So he got up and went. There he saw an Ethiopian eunuch, a high official of Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was in charge of all her treasury. He had come to Jerusalem to worship
28 and was sitting in his chariot on his way home, reading the prophet Isaiah.
29 The Spirit said to Philip, “Go over and join that chariot.”
30 So Philip ran up to it and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet. He asked, “Do you understand what you are reading?”
31 The eunuch said, “How can I, unless someone guides me?” And he invited Philip to come up and sit with him.


32 Now the passage of Scripture he was reading was this:  
“He was led like a sheep to the slaughter,  
and as a lamb before its shearer is silent,  
so He does not open His mouth.
33 In His humiliation, justice was denied Him.  
Who can describe His generation?  
For His life is taken from the earth.”  


34 The eunuch said to Philip, “I ask you, who is the prophet talking about—himself or someone else?”
35 Then Philip opened his mouth and, beginning with this Scripture, preached Jesus to him.
36 As they traveled along the road, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, “Look, here is water! What is stopping me from being baptized?”
37 []
38 So he ordered the chariot to stop, and both Philip and the eunuch went down into the water, and Philip baptized him.
39 When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord carried Philip away, and the eunuch did not see him again, but went on his way rejoicing.
40 Philip, however, found himself at Azotus, and as he traveled, he preached the gospel in all the towns until he came to Caesarea.




Chapter 9


1 Now Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest
2 and asked him for letters to the synagogues in Damascus, so that if he found any belonging to the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them under arrest to Jerusalem.


3 As he traveled, he was approaching Damascus, and suddenly a light from heaven flashed around him.
4 Falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting Me?"
5 He said, "Who are You, Lord?" And He said, "I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
6 But get up and go into the city, and you will be told what you must do."


7 The men traveling with him stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one.
8 Saul got up from the ground, and though his eyes were open, he could see nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus.
9 For three days he was without sight, and he neither ate nor drank.


10 Now there was a disciple in Damascus named Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, "Ananias." And he said, "Here I am, Lord."
11 The Lord said to him, "Get up and go to the street called Straight, and inquire at the house of Judas for a man from Tarsus named Saul, and right now, he is praying,
12 and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias come in and lay hands on him so that he might regain his sight."
13 But Ananias answered, "Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much harm he has done to Your saints in Jerusalem.
14 And here he has authority from the chief priests to arrest all who call on Your name."


15 But the Lord said to him, "Go, for he is a chosen instrument of Mine to carry My name before the Gentiles and kings and the sons of Israel.
16 For I will show him how much he must suffer for My name’s sake."


17 So Ananias departed and entered the house. After laying his hands on him, he said, "Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus, who appeared to you on the road by which you were coming, has sent me so that you may regain your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit."


18 Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he regained his sight. He got up and was baptized,
19 and after taking food, he regained his strength. Now for several days he was with the disciples in Damascus,
20 and immediately he began to proclaim Jesus in the synagogues, saying, "He is the Son of God."


21 All those who heard him were amazed and said, "Is this not the man who in Jerusalem destroyed those who called on this name and had come here for the purpose of bringing them bound before the chief priests?"
22 But Saul kept increasing in strength and confounding the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus is the Christ.


23 When many days had passed, the Jews plotted together to kill him,
24 but their plot became known to Saul. They were also watching the gates day and night so that they might kill him,
25 but his disciples took him by night and let him down through an opening in the wall, lowering him in a basket.


26 When he arrived in Jerusalem, he attempted to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
27 But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and he described to them how Saul had seen the Lord on the road, and that He had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had spoken boldly in the name of Jesus.
28 So he was with them, moving about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord.
29 He was talking and arguing with the Greek-speaking Jews, but they were trying to kill him.
30 When the brothers learned of this, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him away to Tarsus.


31 So the church throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had peace and was being built up. Walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, it continued to increase.


32 Now as Peter was traveling throughout all those regions, he also came down to the saints who lived in Lydda.
33 There he found a man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years because he was paralyzed.
34 Peter said to him, "Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed." Immediately he got up.
35 All who lived in Lydda and Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.


36 Now in Joppa there was a disciple named Tabitha, which translated is Dorcas. She was full of good works and acts of charity.
37 In those days she became sick and died, and after washing her, they laid her in an upstairs room.
38 Since Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, urging him, "Do not delay in coming to us."
39 So Peter got up and went with them. When he arrived, they brought him to the upstairs room, and all the widows stood beside him, weeping and showing the tunics and garments that Dorcas had made while she was with them.


40 But Peter sent them all outside, knelt down, and prayed. Then turning to the body, he said, "Tabitha, arise." She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up.
41 He gave her his hand and helped her up. Then he called the saints and widows and presented her alive.
42 This became known throughout Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.


43 And Peter stayed in Joppa for many days with a tanner named Simon.




Chapter 10


1 Now there was a man in Caesarea named Cornelius, a centurion of what was called the Italian Cohort,
2 a devout man who feared God with all his household. He gave many alms to the people and prayed to God continually.  


3 About the ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming in and saying to him, “Cornelius!”
4 Staring at him in fear, he said, “What is it, Lord?” And the angel said to him, “Your prayers and your alms have gone up as a memorial before God.
5 Now send men to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter.
6 He is staying with a tanner named Simon, whose house is by the sea.”
7 When the angel who spoke to him had left, he called two of his servants and a devout soldier from those who attended him,
8 and after explaining everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.


9 The next day, as they were traveling and approaching the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray about the sixth hour.
10 He became hungry and wanted to eat, but while they were preparing food, he fell into a trance.
11 He saw heaven opened and something like a great sheet being let down by its four corners to the earth.
12 In it were all kinds of four-footed animals, reptiles of the earth, and birds of the sky.
13 Then a voice came to him, “Rise, Peter; kill and eat.”
14 But Peter said, “By no means, Lord! For I have never eaten anything common or unclean.”
15 Again, a voice came to him a second time: “What God has made clean, do not call common.”
16 This happened three times, and immediately the sheet was taken up into heaven.


17 While Peter was deeply perplexed about what the vision he had seen might mean, the men sent by Cornelius arrived at the gate, having asked for Simon’s house.
18 They called out and asked whether Simon, who was also called Peter, was staying there.
19 While Peter was still thinking about the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three men are looking for you.
20 Get up, go downstairs, and go with them without hesitation, for I have sent them.”
21 So Peter went down to the men and said, “I am the one you are looking for. What is the reason you have come?”
22 They said, “Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous and God-fearing man who is well spoken of by the whole Jewish nation, was directed by a holy angel to send for you and to hear what you have to say.”
23 So he invited them in and gave them lodging.  


The next day, he got up and went with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa went with him.
24 The following day, he entered Caesarea. Cornelius was expecting them and had called together his relatives and close friends.
25 When Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell at his feet, and worshiped him.
26 But Peter lifted him up, saying, “Stand up; I am also a man.”
27 As he talked with him, he went in and found many people gathered.
28 He said to them, “You know that it is unlawful for a Jewish man to associate with or visit a foreigner, but God has shown me that I should not call any man common or unclean.
29 That is why I came without objection when I was sent for. So I ask: For what reason have you sent for me?”


30 Cornelius said, “Four days ago, at this very hour, I was praying in my house at the ninth hour. And behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing
31 and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer has been heard, and your alms have been remembered before God.
32 Send therefore to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter. He is staying in the house of Simon, a tanner, by the sea.’
33 So I sent for you at once, and you have been kind enough to come. Now, therefore, we are all here in the presence of God to hear everything you have been commanded by the Lord.”


34 Then Peter opened his mouth and said, “Truly, I understand that God does not show partiality,
35 but in every nation, the man who fears Him and does what is right is acceptable to Him.
36 As for the message He sent to the sons of Israel, proclaiming the gospel of peace through Jesus Christ—He is Lord of all—
37 you yourselves know what happened throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee after the baptism that John proclaimed:
38 how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power, and how He went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with Him.
39 We are witnesses of everything He did both in the land of the Jews and in Jerusalem. They also put Him to death by hanging Him on a tree.
40 But God raised Him on the third day and allowed Him to be seen,
41 not by all the people, but by witnesses chosen beforehand by God—by us who ate and drank with Him after He rose from the dead.
42 And He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that He is the one appointed by God as Judge of the living and the dead.
43 To Him all the prophets bear witness that through His name everyone who believes in Him receives forgiveness of sins.”


44 While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all who heard the message.
45 The believers from the circumcision who had come with Peter were amazed, because the gift of the Holy Spirit had been poured out even on the Gentiles.
46 For they were hearing them speaking in tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter responded,
47 “Can anyone withhold water for baptizing these who have received the Holy Spirit just as we have?”
48 So he commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay for a few days.  




Chapter 11


1 Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
2 So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the converts from Judaism took issue with him,
3 saying, “You went to uncircumcised men and ate with them!”  


4 But Peter began to explain to them in an orderly manner, saying,
5 “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance, I saw a vision—an object like a large sheet was coming down, being lowered from heaven by its four corners, and it came to me.
6 Looking closely at it, I considered it and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild beasts, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
7 Then I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Get up, Peter; kill and eat!’
8 But I said, ‘By no means, Lord! For nothing common or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’
9 But the voice from heaven answered a second time, ‘What God has made clean, you must not call common.’
10 This happened three times, and then everything was pulled up again into heaven.  


11 And behold, at that very moment, three men arrived at the house where we were staying, sent from Caesarea to me.
12 The Spirit told me to go with them without hesitation. These six brothers also went with me, and we entered the man’s house.
13 He told us how he had seen an angel standing in his house and saying, ‘Send to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter.
14 He will speak to you words by which you and all your household will be saved.’
15 As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit came upon them just as He did upon us at the beginning.
16 Then I remembered the word of the Lord, how He used to say, ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’
17 Therefore, if God gave them the same gift as He also gave to us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to stand in God’s way?”  


18 When they heard this, they became silent, and they glorified God, saying, “Then God has also granted the Gentiles repentance leading to life!”  


19 Now those who had been scattered because of the persecution that arose over Stephen went as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except Jews.
20 But there were some of them, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, who came to Antioch and began speaking to the Greeks as well, proclaiming the good news about the Lord Jesus.
21 And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.
22 News about them reached the ears of the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch.
23 When he arrived and saw the grace of God, he rejoiced and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with steadfast hearts.
24 For he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a great many people were added to the Lord.  


25 Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul,
26 and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. For an entire year, they met with the church and taught a great many people. And it was in Antioch that the disciples were first called Christians.  


27 Now in those days, some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
28 One of them, named Agabus, stood up and predicted by the Spirit that a great famine was going to come over the whole world, which happened during the reign of Claudius.
29 So the disciples decided to send relief to the brothers living in Judea, each according to his ability.
30 And they did so, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.




Chapter 12


1 About that time, King Herod laid hands on some from the church to mistreat them.
2 He put James, the brother of John, to death with the sword.
3 When he saw that this pleased the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter as well—this happened during the Feast of Unleavened Bread.
4 After seizing him, he put him in prison, handing him over to four squads of soldiers to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
5 So Peter was kept in prison, but the church was earnestly praying to God for him.  


6 On the very night before Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains, while guards stood watch at the door of the prison.
7 Suddenly, an angel of the Lord appeared, and a light shone in the cell. Touching Peter on the side, he woke him up, saying, “Get up quickly!” And the chains fell off his hands.
8 Then the angel said to him, “Get dressed and put on your sandals.” And he did so. Then he said to him, “Wrap your cloak around yourself and follow me.”
9 Peter went out and followed him, but he did not realize that what was happening through the angel was real—he thought he was seeing a vision.
10 After passing the first and second guard posts, they came to the iron gate leading into the city, which opened for them by itself. They went outside and walked down one street, and immediately the angel left him.  


11 When Peter came to himself, he said, “Now I truly know that the Lord has sent His angel and rescued me from Herod’s hand and from all that the Jewish people were expecting.”
12 When he realized this, he went to the house of Mary, the mother of John (who was also called Mark), where many had gathered and were praying.
13 When he knocked at the door of the outer gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer.
14 When she recognized Peter’s voice, she was so overjoyed that she did not open the gate but ran inside and announced that Peter was standing at the gate.
15 They said to her, “You’re out of your mind.” But she kept insisting that it was true, and they said, “It’s his angel.”
16 Meanwhile, Peter kept knocking. When they opened the door and saw him, they were amazed.
17 Motioning to them with his hand to be silent, he described to them how the Lord had led him out of the prison. Then he said, “Tell these things to James and the brothers.” And he departed and went to another place.  


18 At daybreak, there was a great commotion among the soldiers over what had become of Peter.
19 After Herod searched for him and did not find him, he interrogated the guards and ordered them to be executed. Then he went down from Judea to Caesarea and stayed there.  


20 Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon. They came to him as a group, and after winning over Blastus, who was in charge of the king’s bedroom, they asked for peace because their region depended on the king’s land for food.
21 On an appointed day, Herod, dressed in royal robes, sat on the throne and delivered a speech to them.
22 The people began to shout, “The voice of a god, and not of a man!”
23 Immediately, an angel of the Lord struck him down because he did not give glory to God, and he was eaten by worms and died.  


24 But the word of God continued to grow and spread.
25 And Barnabas and Saul returned from Jerusalem after fulfilling their ministry, bringing with them John, who was also called Mark.




Chapter 13


1 Now there were in the church at Antioch prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen, a close friend of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
2 While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, "Set apart for Me Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them."
3 Then after fasting and praying, they laid their hands on them and sent them off.


4 So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed to Cyprus.
5 When they arrived at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews, and they also had John as their assistant.
6 As they traveled through the whole island as far as Paphos, they came across a magician, a Jewish false prophet named Bar-Jesus.
7 He was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, seeking to hear the word of God.
8 But Elymas the magician (for that is what his name means) opposed them, trying to turn the proconsul away from the faith.
9 But Saul, also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, stared at him
10 and said, "You son of the devil, full of all deceit and all fraud, enemy of all righteousness, will you not stop making crooked the straight paths of the Lord?
11 And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is against you, and you will be blind, unable to see the sun for a time." Immediately a mist and darkness fell upon him, and he went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand.
12 Then the proconsul, seeing what had happened, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.


13 Now Paul and his companions set sail from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia. But John left them and returned to Jerusalem.
14 They continued from Perga and came to Antioch in Pisidia. On the Sabbath day, they went into the synagogue and sat down.
15 After the reading from the Law and the Prophets, the synagogue leaders sent to them, saying, "Brothers, if you have any word of encouragement for the people, speak."


16 Paul stood up, motioned with his hand, and said, "Men of Israel and you who fear God, listen!
17 The God of this people Israel chose our fathers and made the people great during their stay in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, He led them out of it.
18 For about forty years, He put up with them in the wilderness.
19 After destroying seven nations in the land of Canaan, He gave them their land as an inheritance.
20 All this took about 450 years. After that, He gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
21 Then they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul, the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
22 When He removed him, He raised up David as their king, about whom He also testified, saying, 'I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after My own heart, who will do all My will.'
23 From this man’s descendants, according to the promise, God brought Israel a Savior, Jesus.
24 Before His coming, John had proclaimed a baptism of repentance to all the people of Israel.
25 And as John was finishing his course, he said, 'Who do you suppose I am? I am not He. But behold, One is coming after me, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'


26 "Brothers, sons of Abraham’s family, and those among you who fear God, to us the message of this salvation has been sent.
27 For those who live in Jerusalem and their rulers, because they did not recognize Him or the words of the prophets that are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning Him.
28 Though they found no reason for a death sentence, they asked Pilate to have Him executed.
29 When they had fulfilled all that was written about Him, they took Him down from the tree and laid Him in a tomb.
30 But God raised Him from the dead,
31 and for many days He appeared to those who had come up with Him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now His witnesses to the people.
32 And we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers,
33 He has fulfilled for us, their children, by raising up Jesus, as it is also written in the second Psalm: 'You are My Son; today I have begotten You.'
34 And as for the fact that He raised Him from the dead, no longer to return to decay, He has spoken in this way: 'I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.'
35 Therefore, He also says in another Psalm: 'You will not let Your Holy One see decay.'
36 For David, after serving the purpose of God in his own generation, fell asleep, was buried with his fathers, and saw decay.
37 But He whom God raised up did not see decay.


38 "Therefore, let it be known to you, brothers, that through this Man, forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you.
39 And by Him, everyone who believes is justified from everything that you could not be justified from by the Law of Moses.
40 So beware that what is said in the prophets does not happen to you:
41 'Look, you scoffers, be amazed and perish! For I am doing a work in your days, a work you will never believe, even if someone tells you.'"


42 As they were leaving, the people begged that these things be spoken to them again on the next Sabbath.
43 After the synagogue meeting, many of the Jews and devout converts to Judaism followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke with them and urged them to continue in the grace of God.


44 On the next Sabbath, almost the whole city gathered to hear the word of the Lord.
45 But when the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy and began to contradict what Paul was saying, blaspheming.
46 Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly, saying, "It was necessary that the word of God be spoken first to you. But since you reject it and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we are turning to the Gentiles.
47 For this is what the Lord has commanded us: 'I have made you a light to the Gentiles, that you may bring salvation to the ends of the earth.'"


48 When the Gentiles heard this, they rejoiced and glorified the word of the Lord, and all who were appointed to eternal life believed.
49 And the word of the Lord spread throughout the whole region.
50 But the Jews stirred up the devout women of high standing and the leading men of the city, incited persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and drove them out of their district.
51 But they shook off the dust from their feet against them and went to Iconium.
52 And the disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.




Chapter 14


1 Now in Iconium, they entered the Jewish synagogue together and spoke in such a way that a great multitude of both Jews and Greeks believed.
2 But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles and embittered their minds against the brothers.
3 So they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly for the Lord, who testified to the message of His grace by granting signs and wonders to be done through their hands.
4 But the people of the city were divided: some sided with the Jews, and others with the apostles.
5 When both the Gentiles and Jews, along with their rulers, made a plan to mistreat and stone them,
6 they became aware of it and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the surrounding region,
7 where they continued to preach the gospel.


8 In Lystra, a man was sitting who had no strength in his feet, lame from birth, who had never walked.
9 He listened as Paul spoke. Paul looked at him intently and saw that he had faith to be healed.
10 So he said in a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet!” And he jumped up and began to walk.
11 When the crowds saw what Paul had done, they lifted their voices, saying in the Lycaonian language, “The gods have come down to us in human form!”
12 They called Barnabas Zeus and Paul Hermes, because he was the chief speaker.
13 The priest of Zeus, whose temple was just outside the city, brought bulls and garlands to the gates, intending to offer sacrifices with the crowds.  


14 But when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of it, they tore their robes and rushed out into the crowd, shouting,
15 “Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men with the same nature as you, proclaiming to you that you should turn from these worthless things to the living God, who made heaven, earth, the sea, and everything in them.
16 In past generations, He allowed all the nations to go their own ways,
17 yet He did not leave Himself without witnesses, since He did good by giving you rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling you with food and gladness.”
18 Even with these words, they barely kept the crowds from offering sacrifices to them.


19 But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium, and after persuading the crowds, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, thinking he was dead.
20 But when the disciples gathered around him, he got up and went back into the city. The next day he left with Barnabas for Derbe.


21 After they had preached the gospel in that city and made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
22 strengthening the hearts and minds of the disciples, encouraging them to continue in the faith, and saying, “It is necessary to go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of God.”
23 When they had appointed elders for them in every church and prayed with fasting, they entrusted them to the Lord in whom they had believed.


24 After passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
25 When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
26 From there they sailed back to Antioch, where they had been entrusted to the grace of God for the work they had now completed.
27 When they arrived, they gathered the church together and reported everything God had done with them and how He had opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
28 And they stayed there a long time with the disciples.  




Chapter 15


1 Some men came down from Judea and were teaching the brothers, “Unless you are circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.”
2 This led to a major dispute and debate between Paul and Barnabas and these men. So it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some others should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question.


3 Sent on their way by the church, they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, describing the conversion of the Gentiles, and this brought great joy to all the brothers.
4 When they arrived in Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church, the apostles, and the elders, and they reported everything God had done through them.
5 But some believers who had previously been Pharisees stood up and said, “It is necessary to circumcise them and to command them to keep the Law of Moses.”


6 The apostles and elders gathered to consider this matter.
7 After much debate, Peter stood up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that from the early days God chose that, through my mouth, the Gentiles would hear the message of the gospel and believe.
8 And God, who knows the heart, testified to them by giving them the Holy Spirit just as He did to us.
9 He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith.
10 So why are you now testing God by placing on the necks of the disciples a yoke that neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?
11 On the contrary, we believe we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus in the same way they are.”


12 The whole assembly fell silent and listened to Barnabas and Paul as they described the signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles through them.
13 After they finished speaking, James responded, “Brothers, listen to me.
14 Simeon has reported how God first visited the Gentiles to take from them a people for His name.
15 And the words of the prophets agree with this, just as it is written:


16 ‘After this, I will return  
and rebuild David’s fallen tent.  
I will rebuild its ruins  
and restore it,


17 so that the rest of mankind may seek the Lord,  
including all the Gentiles who are called by My name—  
says the Lord who makes these things
18 known from long ago.’


19 Therefore, in my judgment, we should not trouble those from the Gentiles who are turning to God,
20 but instead we should write to them to abstain from things polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from what has been strangled, and from blood.
21 For since ancient times, Moses has had those who proclaim him in every city, being read in the synagogues every Sabbath.”


22 Then the apostles and elders, along with the whole church, decided to choose men from among them and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas—Judas, called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men among the brothers.
23 They sent this letter with them:  


“The apostles and the elders, your brothers, to the brothers from the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: Greetings.


24 Since we have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and troubled you with their words, unsettling your souls,
25 it seemed good to us, having reached a unanimous decision, to send men to you along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
26 men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
27 Therefore, we have sent Judas and Silas, who will also tell you the same things by word of mouth.
28 For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to place any greater burden on you than these necessary things:
29 that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality. If you keep yourselves from these, you will do well. Farewell.”


30 So they were sent off and went down to Antioch, and when they had gathered the assembly, they delivered the letter.
31 When the people read it, they rejoiced because of its encouragement.
32 Judas and Silas, who were also prophets, encouraged and strengthened the brothers with many words.
33 After spending some time there, they were sent off in peace by the brothers to those who had sent them.
34 []
35 But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord along with many others.


36 After some time, Paul said to Barnabas, “Let’s go back and visit the brothers in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord to see how they are doing.”
37 Barnabas wanted to take John, called Mark, with them,
38 but Paul insisted that they should not take him because he had deserted them in Pamphylia and had not continued with them in the work.
39 They had such a sharp disagreement that they parted ways. Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus,
40 but Paul chose Silas and departed, having been commended by the brothers to the grace of the Lord.
41 He traveled through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the churches.




Chapter 16


1 Paul came also to Derbe and to Lystra. A disciple named Timothy was there, the son of a believing Jewish woman but of a Greek father,
2 who was well spoken of by the brothers in Lystra and Iconium.
3 Paul wanted Timothy to go with him, so he took him and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those places, for they all knew that his father was Greek.
4 As they went through the cities, they delivered to them the decrees that had been decided upon by the apostles and elders in Jerusalem, for them to keep.
5 So the churches were strengthened in the faith and increased in number daily.  


6 They went through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia.
7 When they came to Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit of Jesus did not permit them.
8 So, passing by Mysia, they went down to Troas.
9 A vision appeared to Paul in the night: a Macedonian man was standing and urging him, saying, "Come over to Macedonia and help us."
10 When Paul saw the vision, we immediately sought to go into Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.  


11 Setting sail from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the next day to Neapolis,
12 and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of the district of Macedonia, a Roman colony. We remained in this city for some days.
13 On the Sabbath, we went outside the city gate by the river, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had gathered.
14 A woman named Lydia, a seller of purple cloth from the city of Thyatira, who worshiped God, was listening. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was spoken by Paul.
15 After she and her household were baptized, she urged us, saying, "If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come and stay in my house." And she persuaded us.  


16 As we were going to the place of prayer, a slave girl met us who had a spirit of divination and brought her masters much profit by fortune-telling.
17 She followed Paul and us, crying out, "These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to you the way of salvation."
18 She did this for many days. But Paul, greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, "I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her." And it came out at that very moment.  


19 When her masters saw that their hope of profit was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.
20 They brought them to the magistrates and said, "These men are throwing our city into confusion. They are Jews
21 and are proclaiming customs that are not lawful for us, being Romans, to accept or practice."
22 The crowd rose up together against them, and the magistrates tore off their garments and ordered them to be beaten with rods.
23 After giving them many blows, they threw them into prison, ordering the jailer to keep them securely.
24 Receiving this order, he put them into the inner prison and secured their feet in the stocks.  


25 About midnight, Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
26 Suddenly, there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken. Immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone's chains were unfastened.
27 When the jailer woke up and saw the prison doors open, he drew his sword and was about to kill himself, thinking that the prisoners had escaped.
28 But Paul shouted with a loud voice, "Do not harm yourself, for we are all here!"
29 The jailer called for lights, rushed in, and fell down trembling before Paul and Silas.
30 He brought them out and said, "Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"
31 They said, "Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you will be saved—you and your household."
32 They spoke the word of the Lord to him and to everyone in his house.
33 That same hour of the night, he took them and washed their wounds. Immediately he and all his household were baptized.
34 He brought them into his house, set a meal before them, and rejoiced greatly that he had believed in God with his whole household.  


35 When it was day, the magistrates sent officers, saying, "Release those men."
36 The jailer reported these words to Paul: "The magistrates have sent orders that you be released. Now therefore, come out and go in peace."
37 But Paul said to them, "They have beaten us publicly without a trial—men who are Roman citizens—and have thrown us into prison. And now, are they sending us away secretly? No! Let them come themselves and escort us out."
38 The officers reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Roman citizens.
39 So they came and pleaded with them, and when they had brought them out, they asked them to leave the city.
40 After leaving the prison, they went to Lydia’s house. There they saw the brothers, encouraged them, and departed.




Chapter 17


1 After passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
2 As was his custom, Paul went in to them, and for three Sabbaths he reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
3 explaining and proving that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead. “This Jesus whom I proclaim to you,” he said, “is the Christ.”
4 Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, along with a great many of the devout Greeks and not a few of the leading women.


5 But the Jews became jealous, and taking some wicked men from the marketplace, they formed a mob and started a riot in the city. They attacked Jason’s house, trying to bring them out to the people.
6 But when they did not find them, they dragged Jason and some of the brothers before the city officials, shouting, “These men who have turned the world upside down have come here too,
7 and Jason has welcomed them. They are all acting against the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king—Jesus.”
8 The crowd and the city officials were disturbed when they heard these things,
9 and after taking security from Jason and the others, they let them go.


10 The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Berea. When they arrived, they went into the synagogue of the Jews.
11 These Jews were more noble than those in Thessalonica, for they received the word with all eagerness, examining the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so.
12 Therefore, many of them believed, along with a number of prominent Greek women and men.
13 But when the Jews from Thessalonica learned that Paul was proclaiming the word of God in Berea, they came there too, agitating and stirring up the crowds.
14 Then the brothers immediately sent Paul away to the coast, while Silas and Timothy remained there.
15 Those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens, and after receiving instructions for Silas and Timothy to come to him as soon as possible, they departed.


16 While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, his spirit was provoked within him when he saw that the city was full of idols.
17 So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who happened to be there.
18 Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also debated with him. Some said, “What is this babbler trying to say?” Others said, “He seems to be a proclaimer of foreign gods,” because he was preaching Jesus and the resurrection.
19 So they took him and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting?
20 For you are bringing some strange things to our ears, and we want to know what they mean.”
21 (Now all the Athenians and the foreigners who lived there spent their time in nothing else but telling or hearing something new.)


22 Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus and said, “Men of Athens, I see that in every way you are very religious.
23 For as I was passing through and observing your objects of worship, I even found an altar with this inscription: ‘To an Unknown God.’ Therefore, what you worship in ignorance, this I proclaim to you.
24 The God who made the world and everything in it, being Lord of heaven and earth, does not dwell in temples made by human hands,
25 nor is He served by human hands as though He needed anything, since He Himself gives to all life, breath, and everything else.
26 From one man, He made every nation of mankind to live on all the face of the earth, having determined their appointed times and the boundaries of their dwelling places,
27 so that they might seek God and perhaps reach out for Him and find Him, though He is not far from any one of us.
28 For in Him we live and move and have our being, as even some of your own poets have said, ‘For we also are His offspring.’


29 Since we are God’s offspring, we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone, an image formed by human skill and imagination.
30 In the past, God overlooked the times of ignorance, but now He commands all men everywhere to repent,
31 because He has set a day when He will judge the world in righteousness by the Man He has appointed. He has given proof of this to all by raising Him from the dead.”


32 When they heard about the resurrection of the dead, some mocked, but others said, “We will hear you again about this.”
33 So Paul left them.
34 But some men joined him and believed, including Dionysius the Areopagite, a woman named Damaris, and others with them.




Chapter 18


1 After this, Paul left Athens and went to Corinth.
2 There he found a Jew named Aquila, a native of Pontus, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla because Claudius had ordered all the Jews to leave Rome. Paul went to see them,
3 and since they shared the same trade, he stayed with them and worked, for they were tentmakers by trade.
4 Every Sabbath he reasoned in the synagogue, trying to persuade both Jews and Greeks.


5 When Silas and Timothy arrived from Macedonia, Paul devoted himself fully to preaching, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
6 But when they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his clothes and said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am innocent. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles.”
7 So he left there and went to the house of a man named Titius Justus, a worshiper of God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
8 Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord along with his entire household, and many of the Corinthians who heard Paul believed and were baptized.


9 One night, the Lord said to Paul in a vision, “Do not be afraid, but speak and do not be silent,
10 for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, because I have many people in this city.”
11 So he stayed there for a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.


12 But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews rose up against Paul with one accord and brought him before the tribunal,
13 saying, “This man persuades people to worship God contrary to the law.”
14 As Paul was about to speak, Gallio said to the Jews, “If this were some wrongdoing or serious crime, Jews, I would tolerate listening to you.
15 But since it is a dispute about words, names, and your own law, see to it yourselves. I refuse to be a judge of these matters.”
16 And he drove them from the tribunal.
17 Then they all seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him in front of the tribunal, but Gallio showed no concern over any of this.


18 Paul stayed many days longer, then took leave of the brothers and set sail for Syria, taking Priscilla and Aquila with him. In Cenchreae, he had his head shaved because of a vow he had taken.
19 When they arrived in Ephesus, he left them there, but he himself went into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews.
20 When they asked him to stay longer, he declined,
21 but as he left, he said, “I will return to you if God wills,” and he set sail from Ephesus.


22 When he landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the church, then went down to Antioch.
23 After spending some time there, he departed and traveled from place to place throughout the region of Galatia and Phrygia, strengthening all the disciples.


24 Now a Jew named Apollos, a native of Alexandria, came to Ephesus. He was an eloquent man, well-versed in the Scriptures.
25 He had been instructed in the way of the Lord and, being fervent in spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately about Jesus, though he knew only the baptism of John.
26 He began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside and explained the way of God to him more accurately.


27 When he wanted to go to Achaia, the brothers encouraged him and wrote to the disciples to welcome him. When he arrived, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace,
28 for he powerfully refuted the Jews in public, proving by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.




Chapter 19


1 While Apollos was in Corinth, Paul traveled through the inland regions and came to Ephesus. There he found some disciples
2 and asked them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?”


They answered, “We haven’t even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.”


3 So he asked, “Into what, then, were you baptized?”


They replied, “Into John’s baptism.”


4 Paul said, “John baptized with a baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who was coming after him—that is, in Jesus.”
5 When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
6 And when Paul laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they began speaking in tongues and prophesying.
7 There were about twelve men in all.


8 Paul went into the synagogue and spoke boldly for three months, reasoning and persuading them about the kingdom of God.
9 But when some became hardened and refused to believe, speaking evil of the Way before the crowd, he withdrew from them and took the disciples with him, reasoning daily in the lecture hall of Tyrannus.
10 This continued for two years, so that all who lived in Asia, both Jews and Greeks, heard the word of the Lord.


11 God was performing extraordinary miracles through Paul,
12 so that even handkerchiefs or aprons that had touched his skin were brought to the sick, and their diseases left them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
13 Now some of the itinerant Jewish exorcists tried to invoke the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had evil spirits, saying, “I command you by the Jesus whom Paul preaches!”
14 Seven sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, were doing this.


15 But the evil spirit answered them, “Jesus I know, and Paul I recognize, but who are you?”
16 Then the man who had the evil spirit jumped on them, overpowered them all, and prevailed against them, so that they ran out of the house naked and wounded.
17 This became known to everyone who lived in Ephesus, both Jews and Greeks, and fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
18 Many who had become believers came confessing and disclosing their practices,
19 and a number of those who had practiced magic brought their books together and burned them in front of everyone. They calculated the value and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.
20 In this way, the word of the Lord grew and prevailed powerfully.


21 After these events, Paul resolved in the Spirit to go through Macedonia and Achaia, then to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been there, I must also see Rome.”
22 So he sent two of those who assisted him, Timothy and Erastus, to Macedonia, while he stayed in Asia for a while.


23 At that time, a major disturbance arose concerning the Way.
24 A silversmith named Demetrius, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought in a great deal of business for the craftsmen.
25 He gathered them together, along with others in similar trades, and said, “Men, you know that our prosperity comes from this trade.
26 And you see and hear that not only in Ephesus but almost all over Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away a large number of people, saying that gods made by human hands are not gods at all.
27 Not only is there danger that our trade will lose its good name, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be discredited, and that she, whom all of Asia and the world worship, will be robbed of her majesty.”


28 When they heard this, they were filled with rage and began shouting, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”
29 The city was thrown into chaos, and they rushed all together into the theater, dragging Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians who were Paul’s traveling companions.
30 Though Paul wanted to go in before the crowd, the disciples would not let him.
31 Even some of the officials of Asia, who were his friends, sent word to him, pleading with him not to venture into the theater.


32 Meanwhile, some were shouting one thing and some another, for the assembly was in confusion, and most of them didn’t even know why they had gathered.
33 Some of the crowd prompted Alexander, whom the Jews had pushed forward. Alexander motioned with his hand and wanted to make a defense to the people.
34 But when they realized he was a Jew, they all shouted in unison for about two hours, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!”


35 When the city clerk had quieted the crowd, he said, “Men of Ephesus, who in all the world doesn’t know that the city of the Ephesians is the guardian of the temple of the great Artemis and of her image that fell from heaven?
36 Since these things are undeniable, you must stay calm and do nothing reckless.
37 For you have brought these men here, though they have neither robbed temples nor blasphemed our goddess.
38 So if Demetrius and his fellow craftsmen have a complaint against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls—let them bring charges against one another.
39 But if you seek anything beyond this, it must be decided in a lawful assembly.
40 As it stands, we are in danger of being charged with rioting today, since there is no justification for this uproar.”
41 After saying this, he dismissed the assembly.




Chapter 20


1 After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, encouraged them, said farewell, and departed for Macedonia.
2 When he had traveled through those regions and given them much encouragement, he came to Greece.
3 He stayed there for three months, but when a plot was made against him by the Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he decided to return through Macedonia.
4 He was accompanied by Sopater, the son of Pyrrhus from Berea, Aristarchus and Secundus from Thessalonica, Gaius from Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus from Asia.
5 These men went on ahead and waited for us at Troas.
6 But we sailed from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and in five days we joined them at Troas, where we stayed for seven days.


7 On the first day of the week, when we were gathered together to break bread, Paul spoke to them, intending to leave the next day, and he extended his message until midnight.
8 There were many lamps in the upper room where we were gathered.
9 A young man named Eutychus was sitting in the window, and as Paul kept speaking for a long time, he was overcome by deep sleep. When he fell asleep, he fell down from the third story and was picked up dead.
10 But Paul went down, bent over him, took him in his arms, and said, “Do not be alarmed, for his life is in him.”
11 When Paul had gone back up, broken bread, and eaten, he talked with them a long while, until dawn, and then departed.
12 They took the young man away alive and were greatly comforted.  


13 We went on ahead to the ship and set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul on board there, for he had arranged it this way, since he intended to travel by land.
14 When he met us at Assos, we took him on board and went to Mitylene.
15 We sailed from there, and the next day we arrived off Chios. The day after that, we reached Samos, and the following day we came to Miletus.
16 For Paul had decided to sail past Ephesus to avoid spending time in Asia, because he was hurrying to be in Jerusalem, if possible, by the day of Pentecost.


17 From Miletus, he sent to Ephesus and summoned the elders of the church.
18 When they came to him, he said to them, “You yourselves know how I lived the whole time I was with you, from the first day I set foot in Asia,
19 serving the Lord with all humility and with tears, enduring trials that came upon me through the plots of the Jews.
20 I did not shrink from declaring to you anything that was beneficial, and I taught you publicly and from house to house,
21 testifying both to Jews and to Greeks about repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus.


22 And now, behold, I am going to Jerusalem, bound by the Spirit, not knowing what will happen to me there,
23 except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city that chains and afflictions await me.
24 But I do not consider my life of any value to myself, if only I may finish my course and the ministry I received from the Lord Jesus—to testify to the gospel of the grace of God.


25 And now, behold, I know that none of you among whom I have gone about preaching the kingdom will see my face again.
26 Therefore, I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of all men,
27 for I did not shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God.
28 Be on guard for yourselves and for all the flock, over which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the church of God, which He purchased with His own blood.
29 I know that after my departure, savage wolves will come in among you and will not spare the flock.
30 Even from among your own number, men will arise, speaking perverse things to draw the disciples away after them.
31 Therefore, stay alert, remembering that for three years I did not cease to warn each of you with tears, night and day.


32 Now I commend you to God and to the word of His grace, which is able to build you up and give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
33 I have not coveted anyone’s silver or gold or clothing.
34 You yourselves know that these hands have provided for my needs and for those who were with me.
35 In everything, I have shown you that by working hard in this way, we must help the weak and remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how He Himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”  


36 When he had said these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all.
37 They all wept freely and embraced Paul, kissing him,
38 grieving most of all because he had said that they would never see his face again. Then they accompanied him to the ship.




Chapter 21


1 When we had torn ourselves away from them and set sail, we ran a straight course to Cos, then the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
2 Finding a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard and set sail.
3 After sighting Cyprus and passing to the south of it, we sailed on to Syria and landed at Tyre, where the ship was to unload its cargo.
4 We sought out the disciples there and stayed for seven days. Through the Spirit, they kept telling Paul not to go to Jerusalem.
5 But when our time there was up, we left and continued our journey. All of them, including their wives and children, accompanied us out of the city, and we knelt on the beach and prayed.
6 After saying farewell, we boarded the ship, and they returned home.  


7 We continued our voyage from Tyre and arrived at Ptolemais, where we greeted the brothers and stayed with them for one day.
8 The next day, we left and came to Caesarea. There we entered the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
9 He had four unmarried daughters who prophesied.
10 While we were staying there for several days, a prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
11 He came to us, took Paul's belt, bound his own feet and hands with it, and said, “This is what the Holy Spirit says: ‘In this way the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt and will hand him over to the Gentiles.’”  


12 When we heard this, both we and the local residents urged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
13 Then Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? I am ready not only to be bound but even to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.”
14 Since he would not be persuaded, we said no more except, “The Lord’s will be done.”  


15 After those days, we got ready and went up to Jerusalem.
16 Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us and brought us to the home of Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, where we were to stay.  


17 When we arrived in Jerusalem, the brothers welcomed us gladly.
18 The next day, Paul went with us to see James, and all the elders were present.
19 After greeting them, he reported in detail what God had done among the Gentiles through his ministry.
20 When they heard this, they glorified God and said to him, “You see, brother, how many thousands of Jews have believed, and they are all zealous for the law.
21 But they have been told about you—that you teach all the Jews who live among the Gentiles to abandon Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children or follow our customs.
22 What should we do then? They will certainly hear that you have come.  


23 So do what we tell you: We have four men who have taken a vow.
24 Take these men, purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses so that they may shave their heads. Then everyone will know that what they have heard about you is nothing, but that you yourself live in obedience to the law.
25 As for the Gentile believers, we have written to them our decision that they should abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from what has been strangled, and from sexual immorality.”
26 So the next day, Paul took the men, purified himself along with them, and entered the temple, giving notice of the completion of the days of purification, when the offering would be presented for each of them.  


27 When the seven days were nearly over, the Jews from Asia, seeing him in the temple, stirred up the whole crowd and seized him,
28 shouting, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches everyone everywhere against our people, our law, and this place. And now he has even brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place!”
29 For they had previously seen Trophimus the Ephesian with him in the city and assumed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
30 The whole city was stirred up, and the people rushed together. Seizing Paul, they dragged him out of the temple, and immediately the gates were shut.  


31 As they were trying to kill him, news reached the commander of the Roman cohort that all Jerusalem was in turmoil.
32 He immediately took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. When they saw the commander and the soldiers, they stopped beating Paul.
33 Then the commander approached, arrested him, and ordered him to be bound with two chains. He asked who he was and what he had done.
34 Some in the crowd shouted one thing and some another. Since he could not determine the truth because of the uproar, he ordered that Paul be brought into the barracks.
35 When Paul reached the steps, the violence of the mob was so great that the soldiers had to carry him.
36 For the crowd kept shouting, “Away with him!”  


37 As he was about to be taken into the barracks, Paul said to the commander, “May I say something to you?”  


He replied, “Do you speak Greek?
38 Aren’t you the Egyptian who started a revolt some time ago and led four thousand men of the Assassins into the wilderness?”  


39 Paul answered, “I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, let me speak to the people.”
40 After receiving permission, Paul stood on the steps and motioned to the people for silence. When there was a great hush, he addressed them in the Hebrew language.




Chapter 22


1 “Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense I now make before you.”  


2 When they heard that he was addressing them in Hebrew, they became even more silent. And he said:  


3 “I am a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city, educated at the feet of Gamaliel according to the strictness of our ancestral law, being zealous for God just as all of you are today.
4 I persecuted this Way to the death, arresting and imprisoning both men and women,
5 as the high priest and the whole council of elders can testify about me. I even received letters from them to the brothers in Damascus, and I was on my way to bring those who were there as prisoners to Jerusalem to be punished.  


6 But as I was traveling and nearing Damascus, about noon, a great light from heaven suddenly flashed around me.
7 I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’
8 I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ And he said to me, ‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you are persecuting.’
9 Now those who were with me saw the light but did not understand the voice of the one speaking to me.
10 I said, ‘What should I do, Lord?’ And the Lord told me, ‘Get up and go into Damascus, and there you will be told everything that has been assigned for you to do.’
11 Since I could not see because of the brightness of that light, I was led by the hand by those who were with me and entered Damascus.  


12 "Then a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well spoken of by all the Jews who lived there,
13 came to me, stood by me, and said, ‘Brother Saul, regain your sight.’ And at that very moment, I looked up at him.
14 Then he said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, to see the Righteous One, and to hear the words from his mouth.
15 For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard.
16 And now, why are you delaying? Get up, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on his name.’  


17 "When I returned to Jerusalem and was praying in the temple, I fell into a trance
18 and saw him saying to me, ‘Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not accept your testimony about me.’
19 But I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that in one synagogue after another I used to imprison and beat those who believe in you.
20 And when the blood of your witness Stephen was being shed, I was standing by, approving, and guarding the garments of those who killed him.’
21 But he said to me, ‘Go, for I will send you far away to the Gentiles.’”  


22 They listened to him up to this word. Then they raised their voices, shouting, “Away with such a man from the earth! He should not be allowed to live!”
23 As they were shouting, throwing off their cloaks, and flinging dust into the air,
24 the commander ordered him to be brought into the barracks, directing that he be interrogated under the whip to find out why they were shouting against him like this.  


25 But as they stretched him out for the lashes, Paul said to the centurion standing there, “Is it lawful for you to whip a Roman citizen who hasn’t been condemned?”
26 When the centurion heard this, he went and reported to the commander, saying, “What are you going to do? For this man is a Roman citizen.”
27 So the commander came and said to him, “Tell me, are you a Roman citizen?” He said, “Yes.”
28 The commander replied, “I bought my citizenship for a large sum.” Paul said, “But I was born a citizen.”
29 Immediately those who were about to interrogate him withdrew, and the commander himself was afraid when he realized that Paul was a Roman citizen and that he had arrested him.


30 The next day, since he wanted to know exactly why Paul was being accused by the Jews, he released him and ordered the chief priests and all the Sanhedrin to assemble. Then he brought Paul down and had him stand before them.




Chapter 23


1 Paul looked intently at the Council and said, “Brothers, I have lived my life before God in all good conscience up to this day.”
2 But the high priest Ananias ordered those standing beside him to strike him on the mouth.
3 Then Paul said to him, “God is going to strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, yet contrary to the law you order me to be struck?”
4 Those standing nearby said, “Do you dare to insult God’s high priest?”
5 Paul replied, “I did not know, brothers, that he was the high priest; for it is written, ‘You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.’”  


6 When Paul perceived that one part of them were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the Council, “Brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. I am on trial concerning the hope of the resurrection of the dead!”
7 When he said this, a dispute arose between the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
8 For the Sadducees say there is no resurrection, nor angels, nor spirits, but the Pharisees acknowledge them all.
9 A great uproar ensued, and some of the scribes of the Pharisees’ party stood up and argued forcefully, saying, “We find nothing wrong with this man. What if a spirit or an angel has spoken to him?”
10 When the dispute became so violent that the commander feared Paul would be torn apart by them, he ordered the soldiers to go down, take him away from them by force, and bring him into the barracks.  


11 The following night, the Lord stood by him and said, “Take courage, for just as you have testified about me in Jerusalem, so also you must testify in Rome.”  


12 When morning came, the Jews formed a conspiracy and bound themselves under a curse, saying they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
13 More than forty men were involved in this plot.
14 They went to the chief priests and elders and said, “We have bound ourselves under a solemn oath not to eat anything until we have killed Paul.
15 Now then, you and the Council must request the commander to bring him down to you, as though you were going to examine his case more thoroughly. But we are ready to kill him before he gets here.”  


16 But the son of Paul’s sister heard of their ambush, so he went and entered the barracks and reported it to Paul.
17 Paul called one of the centurions and said, “Take this young man to the commander, for he has something to report to him.”
18 So he took him and brought him to the commander and said, “The prisoner Paul called me and asked me to bring this young man to you because he has something to tell you.”
19 The commander took him by the hand, drew him aside, and asked, “What is it you have to report to me?”
20 He said, “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the Council tomorrow, as though they were going to inquire more thoroughly about him.
21 But do not be persuaded by them, for more than forty men are lying in wait for him. They have bound themselves under a curse not to eat or drink until they have killed him. Even now, they are ready, waiting for your consent.”
22 The commander dismissed the young man and instructed him, “Tell no one that you have informed me about this.”  


23 Then he called two of the centurions and said, “Prepare two hundred soldiers, seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen to go to Caesarea at the third hour of the night.
24 Also provide mounts for Paul to ride, so that he may be safely brought to Governor Felix.”
25 He wrote a letter with this content:  


26 “Claudius Lysias, to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings.
27 This man was seized by the Jews and was about to be killed by them, but I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman citizen.
28 Wanting to know the charge they were bringing against him, I brought him down to their Council.
29 I found that he was accused concerning questions of their law, but there was no charge deserving death or imprisonment.
30 When I was informed that there was a plot against the man, I sent him to you at once, also instructing his accusers to state their case against him before you.”  


31 So the soldiers took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris as they had been commanded.
32 The next day, they returned to the barracks, allowing the horsemen to continue with him.
33 When they arrived in Caesarea, they delivered the letter to the governor and presented Paul to him.
34 After reading it, the governor asked what province he was from. When he learned that he was from Cilicia,
35 he said, “I will give you a hearing when your accusers arrive.” Then he ordered that Paul be kept under guard in Herod’s palace.




Chapter 24


1 After five days, the high priest Ananias came down with some elders and a lawyer named Tertullus, and they brought charges against Paul before the governor.
2 When Paul had been summoned, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, “Since we have enjoyed much peace through you, and since reforms are being carried out for this nation by your foresight,
3 in every way and everywhere we acknowledge this with all gratitude, most excellent Felix.
4 But so that I do not weary you further, I beg you to grant us a brief hearing in your kindness.  


5 For we have found this man to be a troublemaker, stirring up riots among all the Jews throughout the world and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
6 He even tried to desecrate the temple, so we arrested him.
7 []
8 By examining him yourself, you will be able to learn the truth about all these charges we are bringing against him.”  


9 The Jews also joined in the accusation, asserting that these things were so.  


10 When the governor motioned for him to speak, Paul replied, “Knowing that you have been a judge over this nation for many years, I gladly make my defense.
11 You can verify that it has not been more than twelve days since I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
12 They did not find me arguing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the temple or in the synagogues or in the city.
13 Nor can they prove to you the accusations they are now making against me.  


14 But I confess this to you: according to the Way, which they call a sect, I worship the God of our fathers, believing everything that is in accordance with the Law and written in the Prophets.
15 I have a hope in God, which these men also accept, that there is going to be a resurrection of both the righteous and the wicked.
16 Because of this, I always strive to have a clear conscience before God and men.  


17 After several years, I came to bring alms to my nation and offerings.
18 While I was doing this, they found me in the temple, purified, without a crowd or disturbance.
19 But there are some Jews from Asia who ought to be here before you to bring charges, if they have anything against me.
20 Otherwise, let these men here state what wrongdoing they found in me when I stood before the Sanhedrin,
21 other than this one statement I shouted while standing among them: ‘It is concerning the resurrection of the dead that I am on trial before you today.’”  


22 But Felix, who was well informed about the Way, adjourned the proceedings, saying, “When Lysias the commander comes down, I will decide your case.”
23 He ordered the centurion to keep Paul in custody but to allow him some freedom and not to prevent his friends from attending to his needs.  


24 After some days, Felix came with his wife Drusilla, who was Jewish, and he sent for Paul and listened to him speak about faith in Christ Jesus.
25 As Paul talked about righteousness, self-control, and the coming judgment, Felix became afraid and said, “Go away for now. When I find time, I will summon you.”
26 At the same time, he was hoping Paul would give him money, so he sent for him often and conversed with him.  


27 After two years had passed, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and because he wanted to do the Jews a favor, Felix left Paul in prison.




Chapter 25


1 Three days after Festus arrived in the province, he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
2 The chief priests and the leading men of the Jews presented their case against Paul to him, and they urged him,
3 asking as a favor that he summon Paul to Jerusalem. They were planning to ambush and kill him along the way.
4 But Festus answered that Paul was being held in Caesarea and that he himself was about to go there soon.
5 “So,” he said, “let your influential men go down with me, and if there is anything wrong about the man, let them bring charges against him.”  


6 After spending no more than eight or ten days among them, he went down to Caesarea. The next day, taking his seat on the tribunal, he ordered Paul to be brought in.
7 When Paul arrived, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing many serious charges against him that they could not prove.
8 Paul defended himself, saying, “I have committed no offense against the law of the Jews, against the temple, or against Caesar.”  


9 But Festus, wanting to do the Jews a favor, responded to Paul, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be tried before me there on these charges?”
10 Paul replied, “I am standing before Caesar’s tribunal, where I ought to be tried. I have done nothing wrong to the Jews, as you yourself well know.
11 If I am guilty and have done anything worthy of death, I do not seek to escape it. But if none of their charges against me are true, no one can hand me over to them. I appeal to Caesar!”
12 Then Festus, after conferring with his council, replied, “You have appealed to Caesar; to Caesar you shall go!”  


13 After several days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived in Caesarea to greet Festus.
14 Since they were staying there several days, Festus presented Paul’s case to the king, saying, “There is a man who was left as a prisoner by Felix.
15 When I was in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews brought charges against him, asking for a sentence of condemnation against him.
16 I told them that it is not Roman custom to hand over any man before the accused has the opportunity to meet his accusers face to face and has a chance to make his defense concerning the charges.
17 So when they came here, I did not delay, but the next day I took my seat on the tribunal and ordered the man to be brought in.  


18 When his accusers stood up, they brought no charge against him of the crimes I was expecting.
19 Instead, they had some disputes with him about their own religion and about a certain Jesus, who was dead but whom Paul claimed to be alive.
20 Being at a loss as to how to investigate these matters, I asked if he was willing to go to Jerusalem and be tried there.
21 But when Paul appealed to be held for the Emperor’s decision, I ordered him to be kept in custody until I could send him to Caesar.”  


22 Then Agrippa said to Festus, “I would like to hear the man myself.” “Tomorrow,” he replied, “you will hear him.”  


23 So the next day, Agrippa and Bernice came with great pomp and entered the audience hall with the military commanders and the prominent men of the city. At Festus’s order, Paul was brought in.
24 Festus said, “King Agrippa, and all who are present with us, you see this man about whom the whole Jewish people petitioned me, both in Jerusalem and here, shouting that he ought not to live any longer.
25 But I found that he had done nothing worthy of death. Since he himself appealed to the Emperor, I decided to send him.
26 But I have nothing definite to write to my lord about him. Therefore, I have brought him before you all, and especially before you, King Agrippa, so that after this hearing I may have something to write.
27 For it seems unreasonable to me to send a prisoner without indicating the charges against him.”




Chapter 26


1 Then Agrippa said to Paul, “You are permitted to speak for yourself.”  


So Paul stretched out his hand and began his defense:  


2 “I consider myself fortunate, King Agrippa, that I am about to make my defense before you today concerning all the accusations brought against me by the Jews,
3 especially since you are an expert in all Jewish customs and controversies. Therefore, I beg you to listen to me patiently.  


4 All the Jews know my manner of life from my youth, which was from the beginning among my own nation and in Jerusalem.
5 They have known me for a long time, if they are willing to testify, that according to the strictest sect of our religion, I lived as a Pharisee.
6 And now I stand here on trial because of my hope in the promise made by God to our fathers,
7 the promise that our twelve tribes hope to attain as they earnestly serve God night and day. Because of this hope, O King, I am accused by the Jews.
8 Why is it considered incredible by you that God raises the dead?  


9 Indeed, I myself thought it was necessary to do many things in opposition to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
10 That is exactly what I did in Jerusalem. I locked up many of the saints in prison, having received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death, I cast my vote against them.
11 I punished them often in all the synagogues and tried to force them to blaspheme. In my extreme rage against them, I even pursued them to foreign cities.  


12 While I was traveling to Damascus with authority and a commission from the chief priests,
13 at midday, O King, I saw on the way a light from heaven, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those traveling with me.
14 When we had all fallen to the ground, I heard a voice speaking to me in the Hebrew language: ‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting Me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’  


15 I said, ‘Who are You, Lord?’  


And the Lord said, ‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
16 But get up and stand on your feet. For I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you as a servant and a witness of what you have seen and of what I will reveal to you.
17 I will rescue you from your own people and from the Gentiles—to whom I am sending you
18 to open their eyes, so they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a share among those who are sanctified by faith in Me.’  


19 Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.
20 Instead, I proclaimed first to those in Damascus, then in Jerusalem, and throughout all the region of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent, turn to God, and demonstrate their repentance by their deeds.
21 This is the reason the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me.
22 But I have had God’s help to this day, and so I stand here testifying to both small and great, saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen—
23 that the Christ would suffer, and that by being the first to rise from the dead, He would proclaim light both to our people and to the Gentiles.”  


24 As he was saying these things in his defense, Festus shouted, “You are out of your mind, Paul! Too much learning is driving you insane!”  


25 But Paul replied, “I am not insane, most excellent Festus, but I am speaking words of truth and sound judgment.
26 The king knows about these things, and I am speaking freely to him. I am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice, since it was not done in a corner.
27 King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe.”  


28 Then Agrippa said to Paul, “Are you trying to persuade me to become a Christian so quickly?”  


29 Paul replied, “Whether quickly or not, I pray to God that not only you but also all who are listening to me today might become as I am—except for these chains.”  


30 The king, the governor, Bernice, and those sitting with them stood up,
31 and when they had left, they said to one another, “This man is doing nothing deserving death or imprisonment.”  


32 Then Agrippa said to Festus, “This man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.”




Chapter 27


1 When it was decided that we should sail for Italy, they handed Paul and some other prisoners over to a centurion named Julius, of the Imperial Regiment.
2 Boarding a ship from Adramyttium that was about to sail to ports along the coast of Asia, we put out to sea, accompanied by Aristarchus, a Macedonian from Thessalonica.
3 The next day we put in at Sidon, and Julius treated Paul kindly, allowing him to visit his friends and receive their care.  


4 Putting out to sea from there, we sailed under the shelter of Cyprus because the winds were against us.
5 After crossing the open sea along the coasts of Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra in Lycia.
6 There the centurion found an Alexandrian ship sailing for Italy and put us on board.
7 Sailing slowly for many days and having difficulty arriving off Cnidus because the wind would not allow us to go farther, we sailed under the shelter of Crete off Salmone.
8 With difficulty, we coasted along and came to a place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea.  


9 Since much time had passed and the voyage had become dangerous because even the Fast had already gone by, Paul warned them,
10 saying, “Men, I perceive that this voyage is going to result in damage and great loss, not only of the cargo and the ship but also of our lives.”
11 But the centurion was more persuaded by the captain and the ship’s owner than by what Paul said.
12 Because the harbor was unsuitable for wintering, the majority decided to set sail from there, hoping to reach Phoenix and spend the winter there. It was a harbor of Crete, facing both southwest and northwest.  


13 When a gentle south wind began to blow, they thought they had obtained their goal. We weighed anchor and sailed close along the coast of Crete.
14 But soon a violent wind, called the Euraquilo, rushed down from the land.
15 The ship was caught and could not head into the wind, so we gave way and let it be driven along.
16 Running under the shelter of a small island called Cauda, we barely managed to secure the ship’s lifeboat.
17 After hoisting it up, they used ropes to undergird the ship. Then, fearing they would run aground on the Syrtis, they lowered the drift anchor and were driven along.  


18 Because we were being violently battered by the storm, the next day they began to jettison the cargo.
19 On the third day, they threw the ship’s tackle overboard with their own hands.
20 When neither sun nor stars appeared for many days and the storm continued to rage, all hope of being saved was finally abandoned.  


21 Since they had gone a long time without food, Paul stood among them and said, “Men, you should have listened to me and not set sail from Crete, avoiding this damage and loss.
22 But now I urge you to take courage because there will be no loss of life among you, only of the ship.
23 For last night, an angel of the God to whom I belong and whom I serve stood by me
24 and said, ‘Do not be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. And indeed, God has graciously given you all those who are sailing with you.’
25 So take courage, men, because I believe God that it will happen just as it was told to me.
26 But we must run aground on some island.”  


27 When the fourteenth night came and we were being driven across the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors suspected they were approaching land.
28 Taking soundings, they found the water to be twenty fathoms deep. A little farther on, they took another sounding and found it to be fifteen fathoms.
29 Fearing we would run aground on the rocks, they dropped four anchors from the stern and prayed for daylight to come.
30 Some of the sailors tried to escape from the ship. They let down the lifeboat into the sea, pretending they were going to lower anchors from the bow.
31 But Paul said to the centurion and the soldiers, “Unless these men stay in the ship, you cannot be saved.”
32 So the soldiers cut the ropes to the lifeboat and let it drift away.  


33 As day was about to dawn, Paul urged them all to eat, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day that you have been constantly watching and going without food, having eaten nothing.
34 So I urge you to take some food, for this is for your survival, since not a hair will fall from the head of any of you.”
35 After saying this, he took bread, gave thanks to God before them all, and broke it and began to eat.
36 Then they were all encouraged and took food themselves.
37 There were two hundred seventy-six of us on board.
38 When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship by throwing the grain into the sea.  


39 When daylight came, they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a bay with a beach, where they planned to run the ship ashore if possible.
40 Cutting loose the anchors, they left them in the sea while loosening the ropes of the rudders. Then, hoisting the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
41 But they struck a sandbar and ran the ship aground. The bow stuck fast and remained immovable, while the stern was broken apart by the pounding waves.  


42 The soldiers planned to kill the prisoners so that none of them would swim away and escape.
43 But the centurion, wanting to save Paul, stopped them from carrying out their plan. He ordered those who could swim to jump overboard first and get to land,
44 and the rest to follow, some on planks and some on debris from the ship. In this way, all were brought safely to land.




Chapter 28


1 After we had been brought safely through, we then learned that the island was called Malta.
2 The natives showed us extraordinary kindness, for they kindled a fire and welcomed us all, because of the rain that had started and because of the cold.
3 But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and put them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened onto his hand.
4 When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand, they began saying to one another, “Certainly this man is a murderer, and though he was rescued from the sea, justice has not allowed him to live.”
5 However, he shook the creature off into the fire and suffered no harm.
6 They were expecting that he would swell up or suddenly fall down dead, but after waiting a long time and seeing nothing unusual happen to him, they changed their minds and began saying that he was a god.  


7 Now in the region around that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who welcomed us and entertained us hospitably for three days.
8 It happened that the father of Publius was lying sick with fever and dysentery. Paul went in to him, prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.
9 After this had happened, the rest of those on the island who had diseases also came and were healed.
10 They honored us in many ways, and when we were about to set sail, they put on board whatever we needed.  


11 After three months, we set sail in a ship from Alexandria that had wintered at the island, which had the Twin Brothers as its figurehead.
12 Putting in at Syracuse, we stayed there for three days.
13 From there we sailed around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli.
14 There we found some brothers and were invited to stay with them for seven days, and in this way we came to Rome.
15 The brothers there, when they heard about us, came as far as the Forum of Appius and the Three Taverns to meet us. When Paul saw them, he thanked God and took courage.  


16 When we entered Rome, Paul was allowed to stay by himself, with the soldier who was guarding him.
17 After three days, he called together the leading men of the Jews. When they had gathered, he said to them, “Brothers, though I had done nothing against our people or the customs of our fathers, I was delivered as a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
18 When they examined me, they wanted to release me because there was no reason for me to be put to death.
19 But when the Jews objected, I was compelled to appeal to Caesar—not that I had any accusation to bring against my nation.
20 For this reason, I have requested to see you and speak with you, since it is because of the hope of Israel that I am bound with this chain.”  


21 They said to him, “We have not received letters from Judea about you, and none of the brothers who have come here has reported or spoken anything bad about you.
22 But we want to hear from you what you think, for concerning this sect, we know that it is spoken against everywhere.”  


23 When they had arranged a day for him, they came to him at his lodging in great numbers. From morning until evening, he explained and testified to them about the kingdom of God and tried to persuade them about Jesus from both the Law of Moses and the Prophets.
24 Some were convinced by what he said, but others refused to believe.
25 Being in disagreement with one another, they began to leave after Paul made one final statement: “The Holy Spirit rightly spoke to your fathers through Isaiah the prophet,
26 saying,  


‘Go to this people and say,  
“You will certainly hear but never understand,  
and you will certainly see but never perceive.”  
27 For the heart of this people has grown dull,  
and with their ears they barely hear,  
and their eyes they have closed,  
lest they should see with their eyes,  
hear with their ears,  
understand with their heart,  
and turn, and I would heal them.’  


28 Therefore, let it be known to you that this salvation of God has been sent to the Gentiles, and they will listen.”  


30 Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented quarters and welcomed all who came to him,
31 proclaiming the kingdom of God and teaching about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness and without hindrance.