The Epistle of Paul to the Romans


Chapter 1


1 Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God,
2 which He promised beforehand through His prophets in the Holy Scriptures,
3 concerning His Son, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh,
4 and who was declared to be the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by His resurrection from the dead—Jesus Christ our Lord.
5 Through Him, we received grace and apostleship to bring about the obedience of faith among all the nations for the sake of His name,
6 among whom you also are called to belong to Jesus Christ.  


7 To all those in Rome who are loved by God and called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.  


8 First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is being proclaimed throughout the whole world.
9 For God, whom I serve with my spirit in the gospel of His Son, is my witness how constantly I mention you,
10 always in my prayers, asking if perhaps now, at last, by God’s will, I may succeed in coming to you.
11 For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift to strengthen you—
12 that is, that we may be mutually encouraged by each other’s faith, both yours and mine.  


13 I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that I often planned to come to you (but have been prevented until now) so that I might have some fruit among you as well, just as among the rest of the Gentiles.
14 I am under obligation both to Greeks and to barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.
15 So, for my part, I am eager to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome.  


16 For I am not ashamed of the gospel, for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes—to the Jew first and also to the Gentile.
17 For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as it is written: “The righteous shall live by faith.”


18 For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who by their unrighteousness suppress the truth.
19 For what can be known about God is plain to them, because God has made it plain to them.
20 For since the creation of the world, His invisible attributes—His eternal power and divine nature—have been clearly seen, being understood from what has been made, so that they are without excuse.  


21 For although they knew God, they did not honor Him as God or give thanks, but they became futile in their thinking, and their foolish hearts were darkened.
22 Claiming to be wise, they became fools,
23 and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images resembling mortal man and birds and animals and creeping things.  


24 Therefore, God gave them over in the desires of their hearts to impurity, to the dishonoring of their bodies among themselves,
25 because they exchanged the truth of God for a lie and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen.  


26 For this reason, God gave them over to dishonorable passions. For their women exchanged natural relations for those that are contrary to nature,
27 and likewise the men also abandoned natural relations with women and were inflamed in their lust for one another, men committing shameless acts with men and receiving in themselves the due penalty for their error.  


28 And since they did not see fit to acknowledge God, God gave them over to a debased mind, to do what ought not to be done.
29 They were filled with all manner of unrighteousness, wickedness, greed, and malice. They are full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, and malice. They are gossips,
30 slanderers, haters of God, insolent, arrogant, boastful, inventors of evil, disobedient to parents,
31 senseless, faithless, heartless, ruthless.
32 Though they know God’s righteous decree that those who practice such things deserve death, they not only do them but also approve of those who practice them.




Chapter 2


1 So you have no excuse, O man—whoever you are—when you judge. For in passing judgment on another, you condemn yourself, because you, who judge, practice the same things.
2 Now we know that God’s judgment against those who do such things is based on truth.
3 But do you think, O man—when you judge those who do such things and yet do them yourself—that you will escape God’s judgment?
4 Or do you despise the riches of His kindness, restraint, and patience, not realizing that God’s kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?
5 But because of your stubbornness and unrepentant heart, you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath, when God’s righteous judgment will be revealed.  


6 He will repay each one according to his works—
7 to those who persist in doing good, seeking glory, honor, and immortality, He will give eternal life.
8 But for those who are self-seeking and do not obey the truth but obey unrighteousness, there will be wrath and fury.
9 There will be trouble and distress for every man who does evil, first for the Jew, then for the Greek,
10 but glory, honor, and peace for everyone who does good, first for the Jew, then for the Greek.
11 For there is no partiality with God.  


12 All who have sinned without the Law will also perish without the Law, and all who have sinned under the Law will be judged by the Law.
13 For it is not those who hear the Law who are righteous before God, but those who do the Law who will be justified.
14 For when Gentiles, who do not have the Law, by nature do what the Law requires, they are a law to themselves, even though they do not have the Law.
15 They show that the work of the Law is written on their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts either accusing or even defending them
16 on the day when God will judge the secrets of men through Christ Jesus, according to my gospel.  


17 But if you call yourself a Jew and rely on the Law and boast in God,
18 and know His will and approve what is excellent because you are instructed from the Law,
19 and if you are convinced that you are a guide for the blind, a light to those in darkness,
20 an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of infants, having in the Law the embodiment of knowledge and truth—
21 you then, who teach another, do you not teach yourself? You who preach against stealing, do you steal?
22 You who say that one must not commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who detest idols, do you rob temples?
23 You who boast in the Law, do you dishonor God by breaking the Law?
24 For, as it is written, “The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you.”  


25 Circumcision indeed has value if you practice the Law, but if you break the Law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
26 So if an uncircumcised man keeps the requirements of the Law, will not his uncircumcision be counted as circumcision?
27 The one who is physically uncircumcised but keeps the Law will condemn you, who have the written code and circumcision yet break the Law.
28 For a Jew is not one outwardly, nor is circumcision something merely outward in the flesh.
29 But a Jew is one inwardly, and circumcision is of the heart, by the Spirit, not by the letter. His praise is not from men, but from God.




Chapter 3


1 What advantage, then, does the Jew have? Or what benefit is there in circumcision?
2 Much in every way! First of all, they were entrusted with the very words of God.
3 But what if some were unfaithful? Will their unfaithfulness nullify God’s faithfulness?
4 Absolutely not! Let God be true, though every man be a liar, as it is written:  


   “That You may be justified in Your words  
   and prevail when You are judged.”  


5 But if our unrighteousness highlights God’s righteousness, what shall we say? Is God unjust to inflict wrath? (I am speaking in human terms.)
6 Absolutely not! Otherwise, how will God judge the world?
7 But if through my lie God’s truth abounds to His glory, why am I still judged as a sinner?
8 And why not say—as some slanderously claim that we say—“Let us do evil so that good may come”? Their condemnation is deserved.  


9 What then? Are we any better off? Not at all! For we have already charged that both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin.
10 As it is written:  


   “There is no one righteous, not even one;  
11 there is no one who understands,  
there is no one who seeks God.  
12 All have turned away, together they have become worthless;  
   there is no one who does good, not even one.”  


13 “Their throat is an open grave;  
   with their tongues they practice deceit.”  


   “The venom of asps is under their lips.”  


14 “Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.”  


15 “Their feet are swift to shed blood;  
16 ruin and misery mark their ways,  
17 and the path of peace they have not known.”  


18 “There is no fear of God before their eyes.”  


19 Now we know that whatever the Law says, it speaks to those under the Law, so that every mouth may be silenced and the whole world may be held accountable to God.
20 For by the works of the Law, no flesh will be justified in His sight, but through the Law comes the knowledge of sin.  


21 But now, apart from the Law, the righteousness of God has been revealed, being testified to by the Law and the Prophets—
22 the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ for all who believe, for there is no distinction.
23 For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God,
24 and they are justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
25 God presented Him as a propitiation through faith in His blood, to demonstrate His righteousness, because in His forbearance, He passed over the sins previously committed.
26 It was to demonstrate His righteousness at the present time, so that He would be just and the justifier of the one who has faith in Jesus.  


27 Where then is boasting? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? No, but by the law of faith.
28 For we conclude that a man is justified by faith apart from works of the Law.
29 Or is God the God of Jews only? Is He not also the God of Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles also,
30 since God is one, who will justify the circumcised by faith and the uncircumcised through faith.
31 Do we then nullify the Law through faith? Absolutely not! Instead, we uphold the Law.




Chapter 4


1 What then shall we say, that Abraham, our forefather according to the flesh, has found?
2 For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about—but not before God.
3 For what does Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.”  


4 Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift, but as something owed.
5 But to the one who does not work but believes in Him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is credited as righteousness.
6 Just as David also speaks of the blessing of the man to whom God credits righteousness apart from works:  


7 “Blessed are those whose lawless deeds are forgiven,  
and whose sins are covered;  
8 blessed is the man against whom the Lord will not count sin.”  


9 Is this blessing then only for the circumcised, or also for the uncircumcised? For we say that faith was credited to Abraham as righteousness.
10 How then was it credited? While he was circumcised or uncircumcised? Not while circumcised, but while uncircumcised.
11 And he received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness he had by faith while still uncircumcised, so that he might be the father of all who believe without being circumcised, so that righteousness might be credited to them as well,
12 and the father of the circumcised who are not only circumcised but who also follow in the steps of the faith that our father Abraham had while he was still uncircumcised.  


13 For the promise to Abraham and his offspring that he would be heir of the world did not come through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
14 For if those who are of the law are heirs, faith is made empty and the promise is nullified.
15 For the law brings wrath, but where there is no law, there is no transgression.  


16 That is why it is by faith, so that it may be according to grace, to ensure the promise to all his offspring—not only to those of the law, but also to those of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
17 As it is written: “I have made you the father of many nations.” He is our father in the sight of God, in whom he believed—the God who gives life to the dead and calls things into existence that do not exist.
18 Against hope, he believed in hope, so that he became the father of many nations, according to what was spoken: “So shall your offspring be.”  


19 He did not weaken in faith when he considered his own body, which was already as good as dead (since he was about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah’s womb.
20 He did not waver in unbelief regarding the promise of God, but was strengthened in faith, giving glory to God,
21 being fully convinced that what God had promised, He was also able to do.
22 That is why “it was credited to him as righteousness.”  


23 But the words “it was credited to him” were not written for him alone,
24 but also for us, to whom it will be credited—to those who believe in Him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead.
25 He was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification.




Chapter 5


1 Therefore, since we have been justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
2 Through him, we also have access by faith into this grace in which we stand, and we rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
3 Not only that, but we also rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering produces endurance,
4 and endurance produces character, and character produces hope.
5 And hope does not put us to shame, because the love of God has been poured into our hearts through the Holy Spirit, who has been given to us.  


6 For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.
7 For one will hardly die for a righteous man, though perhaps for a good man someone might even dare to die.
8 But God demonstrates his own love for us in this: while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
9 Much more, then, since we have now been justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.
10 For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, having been reconciled, shall we be saved by his life.
11 Not only that, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.  


12 Therefore, just as sin entered the world through one man, and death through sin, so also death spread to all men, because all sinned.
13 For sin was in the world before the law was given, but sin is not charged where there is no law.
14 Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those who did not sin in the likeness of Adam’s transgression, who is a type of the one who was to come.  


15 But the free gift is not like the trespass. For if by the trespass of one man many died, much more has the grace of God and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abounded to many.
16 And the gift is not like what came through the one who sinned. For judgment from one trespass brought condemnation, but the free gift following many trespasses brought justification.
17 For if by the trespass of one man death reigned through that one man, much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.  


18 So then, just as through one trespass condemnation came to all men, so also through one righteous act justification and life came to all men.
19 For just as through the disobedience of the one man many were made sinners, so also through the obedience of the one man many will be made righteous.
20 Now the law came in so that the trespass might increase, but where sin increased, grace increased all the more,
21 so that just as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign through righteousness leading to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.




Chapter 6


1 What shall we say then? Should we continue in sin so that grace may increase?
2 Absolutely not! How can we who died to sin still live in it?
3 Or do you not know that all of us who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into His death?
4 Therefore, we were buried with Him through baptism into death, so that just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life.  


5 For if we have been united with Him in the likeness of His death, we will certainly also be in the likeness of His resurrection.
6 We know that our old self was crucified with Him so that the body of sin might be rendered powerless, so that we would no longer be enslaved to sin—
7 for the one who has died is freed from sin.
8 Now, if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with Him,
9 knowing that Christ, having been raised from the dead, will never die again; death no longer has dominion over Him.
10 For the death He died, He died to sin once for all, but the life He lives, He lives to God.
11 So you too must consider yourselves dead to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus.  


12 Therefore, do not let sin reign in your mortal body so that you obey its desires.
13 Do not present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God as those who are alive from the dead, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness.
14 For sin will not have dominion over you, because you are not under law but under grace.  


15 What then? Should we sin because we are not under law but under grace? Absolutely not!
16 Do you not know that when you present yourselves as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one you obey—either of sin leading to death, or of obedience leading to righteousness?
17 But thanks be to God that, though you were slaves of sin, you obeyed from the heart the pattern of teaching to which you were handed over,
18 and having been freed from sin, you became slaves of righteousness.  


19 I am speaking in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh. Just as you presented your members as slaves to impurity and to lawlessness leading to more lawlessness, so now present your members as slaves to righteousness leading to sanctification.
20 For when you were slaves of sin, you were free with regard to righteousness.
21 So what fruit did you have then from the things you are now ashamed of? For the end of those things is death.
22 But now, having been freed from sin and enslaved to God, you have your fruit leading to sanctification, and the end is eternal life.
23 For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.




Chapter 7


1 Do you not know, brothers—for I am speaking to those who know the law—that the law has authority over a man as long as he lives?
2 For a married woman is bound by law to her husband while he is alive, but if her husband dies, she is released from the law concerning her husband.
3 So then, if she is joined to another man while her husband is still alive, she will be called an adulteress. But if her husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is not an adulteress if she marries another man.  


4 In the same way, my brothers, you also have died to the law through the body of Christ, so that you may belong to another—to Him who was raised from the dead—in order that we might bear fruit for God.
5 For when we were in the flesh, the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in our bodies, bearing fruit for death.
6 But now we have been released from the law, having died to what held us, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code.  


7 What then shall we say? Is the law sin? Absolutely not! But I would not have known sin except through the law. For I would not have known what coveting was if the law had not said, “You shall not covet.”
8 But sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced in me every kind of coveting. For apart from the law, sin is dead.
9 Once I was alive apart from the law, but when the commandment came, sin came to life, and I died.
10 The very commandment that was meant to bring life resulted in death for me.
11 For sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, deceived me, and through it killed me.
12 So then, the law is holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.  


13 Did what is good, then, bring death to me? Absolutely not! But sin, in order to be recognized as sin, was producing death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become utterly sinful.  


14 For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
15 For I do not understand what I am doing. For I do not do what I want, but I do what I hate.
16 Now if I do what I do not want, I agree with the law that it is good.
17 But now, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.
18 For I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. For the desire to do what is right is present in me, but the ability to carry it out is not.
19 For I do not do the good I want, but I practice the evil I do not want.
20 Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.  


21 So I find this principle at work: When I want to do what is right, evil is present with me.
22 For in my inner being, I delight in the law of God,
23 but I see a different law at work in my body, waging war against the law of my mind and taking me captive to the law of sin that is in my body.
24 Wretched man that I am! Who will rescue me from this body of death?
25 Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, I myself serve the law of God with my mind, but with my flesh, the law of sin.




Chapter 8


1 Therefore, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus.
2 For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set you free from the law of sin and death.
3 For what the Law could not do, since it was weak through the flesh, God did—by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and as a sin offering, He condemned sin in the flesh,
4 so that the righteous requirement of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.  


5 For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit.
6 For the mindset of the flesh is death, but the mindset of the Spirit is life and peace.
7 For the mindset of the flesh is hostile toward God, for it does not submit to the Law of God, nor can it do so.
8 And those who are in the flesh cannot please God.  


9 However, you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he does not belong to Him.
10 But if Christ is in you, though the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness.
11 And if the Spirit of Him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, He who raised Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through His Spirit who dwells in you.  


12 So then, brothers, we are not debtors to the flesh, to live according to the flesh.
13 For if you live according to the flesh, you will die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
14 For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
15 For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, "Abba, Father!"
16 The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God.
17 And if children, then heirs—heirs of God and co-heirs with Christ, if indeed we suffer with Him so that we may also be glorified with Him.  


18 For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worth comparing with the glory that is to be revealed to us.
19 For the creation eagerly waits in expectation for the revealing of the sons of God.
20 For the creation was subjected to futility—not willingly, but because of Him who subjected it—in hope
21 that the creation itself will be set free from its bondage to decay into the glorious freedom of the children of God.
22 For we know that the whole creation has been groaning together in labor pains until now.
23 And not only that, but we ourselves, who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, also groan within ourselves as we eagerly await adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
24 For in this hope we were saved. But hope that is seen is not hope, for who hopes for what he already sees?
25 But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait for it with patience.  


26 Likewise, the Spirit helps us in our weakness. For we do not know what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit Himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
27 And He who searches hearts knows the mindset of the Spirit, because He intercedes for the saints according to the will of God.  


28 And we know that all things work together for good for those who love God, for those who are called according to His purpose.
29 For those whom He foreknew, He also predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son, so that He might be the firstborn among many brothers.
30 And those whom He predestined, He also called; and those whom He called, He also justified; and those whom He justified, He also glorified.  


31 What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
32 He who did not spare His own Son, but gave Him up for us all, how will He not also, along with Him, graciously give us all things?
33 Who will bring a charge against God's elect? It is God who justifies.
34 Who is the one who condemns? Christ Jesus is the one who died—more than that, who was raised—who is also at the right hand of God, who indeed intercedes for us.
35 Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or danger, or sword?  


36 As it is written: "For Your sake we are being put to death all day long; we are regarded as sheep to be slaughtered."  


37 No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through Him who loved us.
38 For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor rulers, neither things present nor things to come, nor powers,
39 neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.




Chapter 9


1 I am speaking the truth in Christ—I am not lying; my conscience bears witness with me in the Holy Spirit—
2 that I have great sorrow and unceasing anguish in my heart.
3 For I could wish that I myself were accursed and cut off from Christ for the sake of my brothers, my kinsmen according to the flesh.
4 They are Israelites, to whom belong the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the Law, the temple service, and the promises.
5 To them belong the patriarchs, and from them, according to the flesh, came the Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever. Amen.  


6 But it is not as though the word of God has failed. For not all who are descended from Israel are truly Israel,
7 nor are they all children because they are Abraham’s descendants. Instead, “Through Isaac your descendants shall be named.”
8 That is, it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, but the children of the promise are regarded as descendants.
9 For this is what the promise said: “At this time I will return, and Sarah shall have a son.”  


10 Not only that, but also when Rebekah conceived children by one man, our forefather Isaac—
11 though they had not yet been born and had done neither good nor evil, so that God’s purpose in election might stand, not because of works but because of him who calls—
12 it was said to her, “The older shall serve the younger.”
13 As it is written, “Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated.”  


14 What shall we say then? Is there injustice with God? Certainly not!
15 For he says to Moses, “I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion.”
16 So then, it depends not on man’s desire or effort, but on God who shows mercy.
17 For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, “For this very reason I raised you up, that I might display my power in you, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.”
18 So then, he has mercy on whom he wills, and he hardens whom he wills.  


19 You will say to me then, “Why does he still find fault? For who can resist his will?”
20 But who are you, O man, to answer back to God? Shall what is formed say to the one who formed it, “Why have you made me like this?”
21 Does not the potter have authority over the clay to make from the same lump one vessel for honorable use and another for dishonorable use?
22 What if God, willing to demonstrate his wrath and make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction,
23 in order to make known the riches of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory—
24 even us whom he has called, not only from the Jews but also from the Gentiles?  


25 As he says in Hosea, “I will call those who were not my people, ‘My people,’ and her who was not beloved, ‘Beloved.’”
26 And in the very place where it was said to them, “You are not my people,” there they shall be called “sons of the living God.”  


27 And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel: “Though the number of the sons of Israel be as the sand of the sea, only the remnant will be saved.
28 For the Lord will carry out his sentence upon the earth fully and decisively.”
29 And as Isaiah foretold, “If the Lord of Hosts had not left us offspring, we would have become like Sodom and been made like Gomorrah.”  


30 What shall we say then? That Gentiles, who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness—that is, a righteousness that comes by faith—
31 but Israel, pursuing a law of righteousness, did not attain it?
32 Why? Because they did not pursue it by faith, but as if it were based on works. They stumbled over the stumbling stone,
33 as it is written: “Behold, I am laying in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, and whoever believes in him will not be put to shame.”




Chapter 10


1 Brothers, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for them is that they may be saved.
2 For I testify about them that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
3 For being ignorant of the righteousness of God and seeking to establish their own, they did not submit to the righteousness of God.
4 For Christ is the culmination of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.  


5 For Moses writes about the righteousness that is from the law: “The man who does these things will live by them.”
6 But the righteousness that is from faith speaks like this: “Do not say in your heart, ‘Who will ascend into heaven?’” (that is, to bring Christ down)
7 or, “‘Who will descend into the abyss?’” (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
8 But what does it say? “The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart”—that is, the word of faith that we proclaim.
9 Because if you confess with your mouth, “Jesus is Lord,” and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
10 For with the heart one believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth one confesses unto salvation.
11 For the Scripture says, “Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.”  


12 For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek, for the same Lord is Lord of all, richly blessing all who call on him.
13 For “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”
14 How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? And how will they believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without someone preaching?
15 And how will they preach unless they are sent? As it is written, “How beautiful are the feet of those who bring good news!”  


16 But not all have obeyed the gospel. For Isaiah says, “Lord, who has believed our report?”
17 So faith comes from hearing, and hearing through the word of Christ.
18 But I say, have they not heard? Indeed they have:  


  “Their voice has gone out into all the earth,  
  and their words to the ends of the world.”  


19 But I say, did Israel not understand? First, Moses says,  


  “I will make you jealous by those who are not a nation;  
  I will make you angry by a foolish nation.”  


20 And Isaiah is even more bold and says,  


  “I was found by those who did not seek me;  
  I revealed myself to those who did not ask for me.”  


21 But to Israel he says, “All day long I have stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people.”




Chapter 11


1 I ask, then, has God rejected His people? By no means! For I myself am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, from the tribe of Benjamin.
2 God has not rejected His people whom He knew in advance. Do you not know what the Scripture says in the passage about Elijah, how he pleads with God against Israel?
3 “Lord, they have killed Your prophets, they have torn down Your altars, and I alone am left, and they are seeking my life.”
4 But what is God’s response to him? “I have kept for Myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to Baal.”
5 In the same way, at the present time, there is a remnant chosen by grace.
6 And if it is by grace, it is no longer by works; otherwise, grace would no longer be grace.  


7 What then? What Israel was seeking, it did not obtain, but the elect obtained it, and the rest were hardened,
8 as it is written:  


   “God gave them a spirit of stupor,  
   eyes that would not see  
   and ears that would not hear,  
   down to this very day.”  


9 And David says,  


   “Let their table become a snare and a trap,  
   a stumbling block and a retribution for them.  
10 Let their eyes be darkened so they cannot see,  
   and bend their backs forever.”  


11 So I ask, did they stumble so as to fall beyond recovery? By no means! But salvation has come to the Gentiles, so as to make Israel jealous, and it’s Israel’s own fault.
12 Now if by their fault the world is enriched, and their failure benefits the Gentiles, how much more will their obedience bring?  


13 Now I am speaking to you Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am an apostle to the Gentiles, I magnify my ministry,
14 in the hope that I may somehow make my own people jealous and save some of them.
15 For if their rejection means the reconciliation of the world, what will their acceptance mean but life from the dead?
16 If the first portion of dough is holy, so is the whole lump; and if the root is holy, so are the branches.  


17 But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, a wild olive shoot, were grafted in among them and have become a partaker of the rich root of the olive tree,
18 do not boast against the branches. But if you do boast, remember that it is not you who support the root, but the root supports you.
19 You will say, “Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.”
20 That is true. They were broken off because of unbelief, and you stand by faith. Do not be arrogant, but stand in reverence.
21 For if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will He spare you.
22 Consider then the kindness and severity of God: severity toward those who have fallen, but kindness toward you—provided you continue in His kindness. Otherwise, you too will be cut off.
23 And they also, if they do not persist in unbelief, will be grafted back in, for God is able to graft them in again.
24 For if you were cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree and were grafted—contrary to nature—into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these, the natural branches, be grafted back into their own olive tree?  


25 For I do not want you to be ignorant of this mystery, brothers, so that you may not be wise in your own estimation: a partial hardening has come upon Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in.
26 And in this way, all Israel will be saved, as it is written:  


   “The Deliverer will come from Zion,  
   He will remove ungodliness from Jacob.”
27 “And this is My covenant with them  
   when I take away their sins.”  


28 As regards the gospel, they are enemies for your sake, but as regards election, they are beloved for the sake of the fathers.
29 For the gifts and calling of God are irrevocable.
30 Just as you were once disobedient to God but now have received mercy because of their disobedience,
31 so, they too have now been disobedient in order that, by the mercy shown to you, they also may now receive mercy.
32 For God has consigned all to disobedience so that He may have mercy on all.  


33 Oh, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are His judgments and how inscrutable His ways!  


34 “For who has known the mind of the Lord,
   or who has been His counselor?”  
35 “Or who has given to Him,  
   that He should be repaid?”  


36 For from Him and through Him and to Him are all things. To Him be the glory forever. Amen.




Chapter 12


1 I appeal to you, brethren, by the mercies of God, to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice—holy and pleasing to God—which is your rational act of worship.  
2 Do not conform to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind so that you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect.


3 For by the grace given to me I say to every man among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought, but rather to think with sober judgment, in accordance with the measure of faith that God has assigned to each.  
4 For as in one body we have many members, and not all the members have the same function,  
5 so we, though many, are one body in Christ, and individually members of one another.  
6 Let us use the different gifts that we have, according to the grace given to us: if prophecy, let us prophesy in proportion to our faith;  
7 if service, let us serve; if teaching, let us teach;  
8 if exhortation, let us exhort; if giving, let us give generously; if leadership, let us lead diligently; if mercy, let us show it cheerfully.


9 Let love be genuine; abhor what is evil and cling to what is good.  
10 Love one another with mutual affection; outdo one another in showing honor.  
11 Do not lag in zeal, but be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.  
12 Rejoice in hope, be patient in affliction, be constant in prayer.  
13 Contribute to the needs of the saints; practice hospitality toward strangers.


14 Bless those who persecute you; bless and do not curse them.  
15 Rejoice with those who rejoice; weep with those who weep.  
16 Live in harmony with one another; do not be haughty, but associate with the lowly; do not be wise in your own estimation.


17 Repay no one evil for evil; rather, do the right thing in the sight of all.  
18 If it is possible, so far as it depends on you, live at peace with all men.  
19 Beloved, do not take vengeance, but leave room for the wrath of God, for it is written, “Vengeance is mine, I will repay,” says the Lord.  
20 On the contrary, “if your enemy is hungry, feed him; if he is thirsty, give him something to drink;” for by doing so you will heap burning coals upon his head.  
21 Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.




Chapter 13


1 Every person must submit to the governing authorities. There is no authority unless it comes from God, and the ones that exist have been appointed by God.  
2 So then, the one who resists authority is opposing what God has established, and those who oppose will bring judgment on themselves.  
3 For rulers are not a cause of fear for good conduct, but for bad. Do you want to live without fear of authority? Then do what is good, and you will receive approval from it,  
4 for they are God’s servant for your benefit. But if you do wrong, be afraid, because they do not carry a sword for nothing. They are God’s servant, an avenger to bring wrath on the one who does evil.  
5 Therefore, it is necessary to submit, not only because of wrath, but also for the sake of conscience.  


6 This is also why you pay taxes, because the authorities are servants of God, continually attending to this very thing.  
7 Pay what is owed to everyone: taxes to whom taxes are due, tolls to whom tolls are due, respect to whom respect is due, and honor to whom honor is due.  


8 Owe nothing to anyone, except to love one another, for the one who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.  
9 For the commandments, “You shall not commit adultery,” “You shall not murder,” “You shall not steal,” “You shall not covet,” and whatever other commandment there may be, are summed up in this word: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”  
10 Love does no harm to a neighbor; therefore, love is the fulfillment of the law.  


11 And do this, knowing the time: it is already the hour for you to wake up from sleep, because our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed.  
12 The night is nearly over, and the day is approaching. So then, let us throw off the deeds of darkness and put on the armor of light.  
13 Let us walk properly, as in the daytime—not in wild partying and drunkenness, not in sexual immorality and unrestrained behavior, not in quarreling and jealousy.  
14 Instead, put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to gratify its desires.




Chapter 14


1 Accept the one who is weak in faith, but not for the purpose of arguing over opinions.  
2 One man believes he may eat anything, while the weak man eats only vegetables.  
3 The one who eats must not look down on the one who does not eat, and the one who does not eat must not judge the one who eats—for God has accepted him.  
4 Who are you to judge another man's servant? To his own master he stands or falls. And he will stand, for the Lord is able to make him stand.  


5 One man regards one day as more important than another; another regards every day alike. Each man must be fully convinced in his own mind.  
6 The one who observes the day, observes it for the Lord. The one who eats, eats for the Lord, for he gives thanks to God. And the one who does not eat, abstains for the Lord and gives thanks to God.  


7 For none of us lives to himself, and none dies to himself.  
8 If we live, we live for the Lord; and if we die, we die for the Lord. So then, whether we live or die, we are the Lord’s.  
9 For this reason Christ died and returned to life—that He might be Lord of both the dead and the living.  


10 But you, why do you judge your brother? Or you again, why do you treat your brother with contempt? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of God.  
11 For it is written: “As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to Me, and every tongue shall confess to God.”  
12 So then, each of us will give an account of himself to God.  


13 Therefore let us no longer judge one another. Instead, decide never to put a stumbling block or a trap in your brother’s way.  
14 I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus that nothing is unclean in itself. But if anyone considers something to be unclean, for him it is unclean.  
15 For if your brother is distressed because of food, you are no longer walking in love. Do not destroy with your food the one for whom Christ died.  
16 So do not let what is good for you be spoken of as evil.  


17 For the kingdom of God is not about food and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.  
18 For the one who serves Christ in this way is pleasing to God and approved by men.  
19 So then, let us pursue what promotes peace and what builds one another up.  


20 Do not tear down the work of God for the sake of food. All things indeed are clean, but it is wrong for a man to eat if it causes offense.  
21 It is good not to eat meat or drink wine or do anything that causes your brother to stumble.  
22 The faith that you have—keep it between yourself and God. Blessed is the man who does not condemn himself in what he approves.  
23 But the one who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it is not from faith. And whatever is not from faith is sin.




Chapter 15


1 We who are strong ought to bear with the weaknesses of those who are not strong, and not to please ourselves.  
2 Each of us should please his neighbor for his good, to build him up.  
3 For even Christ did not please himself; instead, as it is written, “The insults of those who insult you fell on me.”  
4 For whatever was written beforehand was written for our instruction, so that through endurance and through the encouragement of the Scriptures, we might have hope.  
5 Now may the God of endurance and encouragement grant you to be of the same mind with one another, according to Christ Jesus,  
6 so that with one accord, you may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ with one voice.


7 Therefore, accept one another, just as Christ also accepted you, to the glory of God.  
8 For I say that Christ has become a servant to the circumcised on behalf of God’s truth, in order to confirm the promises made to the patriarchs,  
9 and so that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, “For this reason I will praise you among the Gentiles and sing to your name.”  
10 And again it says, “Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.”  
11 And again, “Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles, and let all the peoples praise him.”  
12 And again Isaiah says, “The root of Jesse will come, and he who rises to rule the Gentiles—in him the Gentiles will hope.”  
13 Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, so that you may abound in hope by the power of the Holy Spirit.


14 I myself am convinced about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, and able also to instruct one another.  
15 But I have written to you more boldly on some points, as a reminder to you, because of the grace given to me by God  
16 to be a minister of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, serving as a priest of the gospel of God, so that the offering of the Gentiles may be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.  
17 Therefore, I have reason to boast in Christ Jesus about the things that pertain to God.  
18 For I would not dare to speak of anything except what Christ has accomplished through me to bring the Gentiles to obedience—by word and deed,  
19 by the power of signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of God. So from Jerusalem all the way around to Illyricum, I have fully proclaimed the gospel of Christ.  
20 And in this way I make it my ambition to preach the gospel in places where Christ has not yet been preached, so that I would not build on another man’s foundation,  
21 but as it is written, “Those who had no report of him will see, and those who have not heard will understand.”


22 This is the reason I have been hindered many times from coming to you.  
23 But now, since I no longer have room to work in these regions, and since I have desired for many years to come to you,  
24 I hope to see you as I pass through on my way to Spain, and to be helped on my journey there by you, once I have first enjoyed being with you for a while.  
25 But now I am going to Jerusalem, bringing aid to the saints.  
26 For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a contribution for the poor among the saints in Jerusalem.  
27 For they were pleased to do so, and indeed they are indebted to them. For if the Gentiles have shared in their spiritual blessings, they are also obligated to minister to them in material things.  
28 Therefore, after I have completed this and have sealed this fruit to them, I will go on by way of you to Spain.  
29 I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of Christ.


30 Now I urge you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to strive together with me in your prayers to God on my behalf,  
31 that I may be rescued from those in Judea who are disobedient, and that my ministry for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints,  
32 so that by God’s will I may come to you with joy and be refreshed in your company.  
33 May the God of peace be with you all. Amen.




Chapter 16


1 I recommend to you our sister Phoebe, a servant of the church in Cenchreae,  
2 so that you may welcome her in the Lord in a manner worthy of the saints, and provide her with any help she may need from you. For she has been a benefactor of many, including me.  


3 Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,  
4 who risked their own necks for my life. Not only I, but all the churches of the Gentiles are grateful to them.  
5 Greet also the church that meets in their house.  


Greet my dear friend Epaenetus, who was the first convert to Christ in Asia.  
6 Greet Mary, who worked very hard for you.  
7 Greet Andronicus and Junia, my kinsmen and fellow prisoners. They are well known among the apostles, and they were in Christ before I was.  


8 Greet Ampliatus, my beloved in the Lord.  
9 Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and my dear friend Stachys.  
10 Greet Apelles, who has been tested and approved in Christ. Greet those who belong to the household of Aristobulus.  
11 Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet those in the household of Narcissus who are in the Lord.  
12 Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who work hard in the Lord. Greet the beloved Persis, who has worked very hard in the Lord.  
13 Greet Rufus, a chosen man in the Lord, and his mother—who has been like a mother to me as well.  


14 Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.  
15 Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints with them.  
16 Greet one another with a holy kiss. All the churches of Christ greet you.  


17 Now I urge you, brothers, to watch out for those who cause divisions and create obstacles contrary to the teaching you have learned. Avoid them.  
18 For such men do not serve our Lord Christ, but their own appetites. By smooth talk and flattery they deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting.  


19 Your obedience has become known to all, so I rejoice over you. But I want you to be wise about what is good and innocent about what is evil.  
20 The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus be with you.  


21 Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my kinsmen.  
22 I, Tertius, who wrote down this letter, greet you in the Lord.  
23 Gaius, who is host to me and to the whole church, greets you. Erastus, the city treasurer, and our brother Quartus greet you.  


25 Now to him who is able to strengthen you according to my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery kept silent for long ages,  
26 but now revealed and made known through the prophetic writings by the command of the eternal God to bring about the obedience of faith among all the nations—  
27 to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, be the glory forever. Amen.