The Epistle of Paul to the Colossians


Chapter 1


1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
2 to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ in Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father.


3 We always thank God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, when we pray for you,
4 since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus and of the love that you have for all the saints,
5 because of the hope laid up for you in heaven. You heard about this hope beforehand in the word of truth, the gospel,
6 which has come to you, just as it is bearing fruit and increasing in all the world, just as it does among you, from the day you heard and truly understood the grace of God.


7 You learned it from Epaphras, our beloved fellow servant. He is a faithful minister of Christ on your behalf
8 and has made known to us your love in the Spirit.


9 For this reason, from the day we heard, we have not ceased praying for you, asking that you may be filled with the knowledge of His will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
10 so that you may walk in a manner worthy of the Lord, fully pleasing to Him: bearing fruit in every good work and growing in the knowledge of God,
11 being strengthened with all power according to His glorious might, for all endurance and patience, with joy,
12 giving thanks to the Father, who has qualified you to share in the inheritance of the saints in light.


13 He has delivered us from the domain of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of the Son He loves,
14 in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.


15 He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
16 For by Him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through Him and for Him.


17 He is before all things, and in Him all things hold together.
18 He is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that He Himself might come to have first place in everything.
19 For in Him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell,
20 and through Him to reconcile all things to Himself, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace through the blood of His cross.


21 And you, who once were alienated and hostile in mind, doing evil deeds,
22 He has now reconciled in His body of flesh through death, in order to present you holy and blameless and beyond reproach before Him—
23 if, indeed, you continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, not shifting from the hope of the gospel that you heard, which has been proclaimed in all creation under heaven, and of which I, Paul, became a minister.


24 Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and I am filling up in my flesh what is lacking in the afflictions of Christ for the sake of His body, that is, the church,
25 of which I became a minister according to the stewardship from God that was given to me for you, to make the word of God fully known—
26 the mystery that was hidden for ages and generations but now has been revealed to His saints.


27 To them God chose to make known the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.


28 We proclaim Him, warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that we may present every man mature in Christ.
29 For this I toil, struggling with all His energy that works powerfully within me.




Chapter 2


1 For I want you to know how great a struggle I have for you, and for those in Laodicea, and for all who have not seen me face to face,  
2 so that their hearts may be encouraged, being united in love and reaching all the wealth of complete understanding, to know the mystery of God—namely, Christ,  
3 in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.  
4 I say this so that no one may deceive you with persuasive speech.  
5 For although I am absent in the body, I am with you in spirit, rejoicing to see your orderly conduct and the firmness of your faith in Christ.


6 Therefore, just as you received Christ Jesus the Lord, continue to walk in Him,  
7 being rooted and built up in Him and established in the faith, just as you were taught, abounding in thanksgiving.  
8 See to it that no one takes you captive through philosophy and empty deceit, according to human tradition, according to the elemental principles of the world, and not according to Christ.  
9 For in Him the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily,  
10 and you have been made complete in Him, who is the head over every ruler and authority.  
11 In Him you were also circumcised with a circumcision not done by hands, but by putting off the body of flesh in the circumcision of Christ,  
12 having been buried with Him in baptism, in which you were also raised with Him through faith in the working of God, who raised Him from the dead.


13 And you, who were dead in your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh, God made alive together with Him, having forgiven us all our trespasses.  
14 He wiped out the record of debt against us with its legal demands, which was hostile to us. He took it away by nailing it to the cross.
15 He disarmed the rulers and authorities and publicly disgraced them, triumphing over them in it [the cross].


16 Therefore, do not let anyone judge you in regard to food or drink or in regard to a festival or a new moon or Holiday Sabbaths.  
17 These are a shadow of things to come, but the reality belongs to Christ.  
18 Let no one disqualify you, insisting on self-abasement and the worship of angels, going on in detail about visions, puffed up without cause by his fleshly mind,  
19 and not holding fast to the Head, from whom the whole body, supported and held together by its joints and ligaments, grows with the growth that comes from God.


20 If you died with Christ to the elemental principles of the world, why, as though you were still living in the world, do you submit to its regulations—  
21 “Do not handle, do not taste, do not touch”?  
22 All these refer to things that perish with use; they are based on merely human commands and teachings.  
23 These have an appearance of wisdom with self-imposed religion, false humility, and harsh treatment of the body, but they are of no value in restraining the indulgence of the flesh.




Chapter 3


1 So if you’ve been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God.
2 Set your mind on things above, not on earthly things.
3 For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
4 When Christ—your life—appears, then you also will appear with Him in glory.


5 Put to death, then, whatever is earthly in you: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and greed, which is idolatry.
6 Because of these things, the wrath of God is coming upon the sons of disobedience.
7 You once walked in these things when you were living in them.
8 But now you must rid yourselves of all things like anger, rage, malice, slander, and obscene speech from your mouth.
9 Do not lie to one another, since you’ve taken off the old man with his practices
10 and have put on the new man, who is being renewed in knowledge according to the image of his Creator.
11 Here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, or free, but Christ is all and in all.


12 Therefore, as God’s chosen ones, holy and dearly loved, put on a heart of compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
13 bearing with one another and forgiving each other if anyone has a complaint against someone. Just as the Lord forgave you, so also you must forgive.
14 And above all these things, put on love, which binds everything together in perfect unity.


15 Let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to which indeed you were called in one body. And be thankful.
16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, teaching and admonishing one another in all wisdom, singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs with gratitude in your hearts to God.
17 And whatever you do in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him.


18 Wives, submit yourselves to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
19 Husbands, love your wives and do not be harsh with them.
20 Children, obey your parents in everything, for this pleases the Lord.
21 Fathers, do not provoke your children, so they don’t become discouraged.


22 Slaves, obey your earthly masters in everything—not with external service as those trying to please men, but with sincerity of heart, fearing the Lord.
23 Whatever you do, work at it wholeheartedly, as for the Lord and not for men,
24 knowing that you will receive the inheritance as your reward from the Lord. Serve Christ the Lord.
25 For the one who does wrong will be repaid for his wrong, and there is no favoritism.




Chapter 4


1 Masters, treat your slaves justly and fairly, knowing that you too have a Master in heaven.


2 Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful in it with thanksgiving.
3 At the same time, pray also for us, that God would open a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ—for which I am in chains—
4 so that I may make it clear, as I ought to speak.


5 Walk in wisdom toward outsiders, making the most of the opportunity.
6 Let your speech always be gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you ought to answer each person.


7 Tychicus will tell you all the news about me. He is a beloved brother, a faithful servant, and fellow slave in the Lord.
8 I have sent him to you for this very purpose, that you may know our situation and that he may encourage your hearts.
9 He is coming with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will tell you everything that has happened here.


10 Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, as does Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom you have received instructions—if he comes to you, welcome him),
11 and Jesus who is called Justus. These are the only ones of the circumcision who are fellow workers for the kingdom of God, and they have been a comfort to me.


12 Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ Jesus, greets you. He is always striving in prayer on your behalf, that you may stand mature and fully assured in all the will of God.
13 For I testify about him that he has worked hard for you and for those in Laodicea and in Hierapolis.


14 Luke, the beloved physician, greets you, as does Demas.
15 Greet the brothers in Laodicea, and Nympha and the church that meets in her house.
16 And when this letter has been read among you, make sure it is also read in the church of the Laodiceans, and that you also read the letter from Laodicea.


17 And say to Archippus, “Pay attention to the ministry that you have received in the Lord, so that you may fulfill it.”


18 I, Paul, write this greeting with my own hand. Remember my chains. Grace be with you.