The First Epistle of Paul to Timothy


Chapter 1


1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the command of God our Savior and of Christ Jesus, who is our hope,
2 To Timothy, my true child in the faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. 


3 As I urged you when I was going to Macedonia, remain at Ephesus so that you may charge certain persons not to teach any different doctrine
4 nor to devote themselves to myths and endless genealogies, which promote speculations rather than the stewardship from God that is by faith.


5 The aim of our charge is love that issues from a pure heart and a good conscience and a sincere faith.
6 Certain persons, by swerving from these, have wandered away into vain discussion,
7 desiring to be teachers of the law, without understanding either what they are saying or the things about which they make confident assertions. 


8 Now we know that the law is good, if one uses it lawfully,
9 understanding this, that the law is not laid down for the just but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for those who strike their fathers and mothers, for murderers,
10 the sexually immoral, men who practice homosexuality, enslavers, liars, perjurers, and whatever else is contrary to sound doctrine,
11 in accordance with the gospel of the glory of the blessed God with which I have been entrusted. 


12 I thank Him who has given me strength, Christ Jesus our Lord, because He judged me faithful, appointing me to His service,
13 though formerly I was a blasphemer, persecutor, and insolent opponent. But I received mercy because I had acted ignorantly in unbelief,
14 and the grace of our Lord overflowed for me with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.


15 The saying is trustworthy and deserving of full acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am the foremost.
16 But I received mercy for this reason, that in me, as the foremost, Jesus Christ might display His perfect patience as an example to those who were to believe in Him for eternal life.


17 To the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, the only God, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.


18 This charge I entrust to you, Timothy, my child, in accordance with the prophecies previously made about you, that by them you may wage the good warfare,
19 holding faith and a good conscience. By rejecting this, some have made shipwreck of their faith,
20 among whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I have handed over to Satan so that they may learn not to blaspheme.




Chapter 2


1 I urge, then, first of all, that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people,
2 for kings and all those in authority, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness.
3 This is good, and pleases God our Savior,
4 who wants all men to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth.
5 For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
6 who gave Himself as a ransom for all people. This has now been witnessed to at the proper time.
7 And for this purpose I was appointed a herald and an apostle—I am telling the truth, I am not lying—and a true and faithful teacher of the Gentiles.


8 Therefore I want the men everywhere to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger or disputing.
9 I also want the women to dress modestly, with decency and propriety, adorning themselves, not with elaborate hairstyles or gold or pearls or expensive clothes,
10 but with good deeds, appropriate for women who profess to worship God.


11 A woman should learn in quietness and full submission.
12 I do not permit a woman to teach or to assume authority over a man; she must be quiet.
13 For Adam was formed first, then Eve.
14 And Adam was not the one deceived; it was the woman who was deceived and became a sinner.
15 But women will be saved through childbearing—if they continue in faith, love, and holiness with propriety.




Chapter 3


1 This saying is trustworthy: if a man aspires to the office of elder, he desires a noble work.
2 Therefore, the elder must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, sober-minded, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach,
3 not a drunkard, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money.
4 He must manage his own household well, keeping his children submissive with all dignity
5 (for if a man does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for the church of God?).
6 He must not be a recent convert, lest, being puffed up with pride, he fall into the judgment of the devil.
7 Moreover, he must have a good reputation with those outside, so that he may not fall into disgrace and the snare of the devil.


8 Deacons likewise must be dignified, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for dishonest gain.
9 They must hold to the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience.
10 And these also must be tested first; then let them serve as deacons if they are beyond reproach.


11 Their wives likewise must be dignified, not slanderers, but sober-minded, faithful in all things.
12 Let deacons be the husbands of one wife, managing their children and their own households well.
13 For those who serve well as deacons gain for themselves a good standing and great boldness in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.


14 I am writing these things to you, though I hope to come to you soon,
15 but if I delay, you may know how one ought to behave in the household of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.


16 And undeniably great is the mystery of godliness:
He was manifested in the flesh,
vindicated by the Spirit,
seen by angels,
proclaimed among the nations,
believed on in the world,
taken up in glory.




Chapter 4


1 Now the Spirit explicitly says that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to deceitful spirits and teachings of demons,
2 through the hypocrisy of liars whose consciences have been seared.
3 They forbid marriage and require abstaining from foods that God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.


4 For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected if it is received with thanksgiving,
5 for it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.


6 If you point these things out to the brothers, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, being nourished on the words of the faith and of the good teaching that you have followed.
7 But reject profane and old wives’ tales, and train yourself for godliness.
8 For bodily training is of some value, but godliness is valuable in every way, having promise for the present life and also for the life to come.
9 This saying is trustworthy and worthy of full acceptance.
10 For to this end we labor and strive, because we have our hope set on the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe.


11 Command and teach these things.


12 Let no one look down on your youth, but be an example to the believers in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
13 Until I come, devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture, to exhortation, to teaching.
14 Do not neglect the gift that is in you, which was given to you through prophecy with the laying on of hands by the council of elders.
15 Practice these things; be in them, so that your progress may be evident to all.
16 Pay close attention to yourself and to the teaching. Persevere in them, for by doing so you will save both yourself and those who hear you.




Chapter 5


1 Do not rebuke an older man harshly, but appeal to him as a father, younger men as brothers,
2 older women as mothers, younger women as sisters, in all purity.


3 Honor widows who are truly widows.
4 But if a widow has children or grandchildren, let them first learn to practice piety in regard to their own household and to repay their parents, for this is acceptable before God.
5 Now she who is truly a widow and left all alone has set her hope on God and continues in supplications and prayers night and day.
6 But she who lives for pleasure is dead even while she lives.
7 Command these things as well, so that they may be above reproach.
8 But if anyone does not provide for his own, and especially for members of his household, he has denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever.


9 Let a widow be enrolled if she is not less than sixty years old, the wife of one man,
10 having a reputation for good works, if she has brought up children, if she has shown hospitality to strangers, if she has washed the feet of the saints, if she has helped those in distress, if she has devoted herself to every good work.


11 But refuse to enroll younger widows, for when their passions draw them away from Christ, they desire to marry,
12 and so incur judgment because they have set aside their former pledge.
13 And at the same time they also learn to be idle, going around from house to house — and not only idle but also gossips and busybodies, saying things they should not say.
14 Therefore I want younger widows to marry, to bear children, to manage their households, and to give the adversary no occasion for reproach.
15 For some have already turned aside to follow Satan.
16 If any believing woman has widows in her family, let her assist them, and let the church not be burdened, so that it may assist those who are truly widows.


17 Let the elders who lead well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in word and teaching.
18 For the Scripture says, “You shall not muzzle an ox while it is threshing,” and, “The laborer is worthy of his wages.”
19 Do not accept an accusation against an elder except on the evidence of two or three witnesses.
20 Those who continue in sin rebuke in the presence of all, so that the rest also may fear.
21 I solemnly charge you in the presence of God and Christ Jesus and the elect angels to observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing out of partiality.


22 Do not lay hands hastily on anyone, nor share in the sins of others; keep yourself pure.
23 No longer drink only water, but use a little grape juice for the sake of your stomach and your frequent illnesses.


24 The sins of some men are obvious, going before them into judgment, but those of others follow after.
25 In the same way also, good works are obvious, and even those that are not cannot remain hidden.




Chapter 6


1 Let all who are under the yoke as slaves regard their own masters as worthy of all honor, so that the name of God and the teaching may not be blasphemed.
2 And those who have believing masters must not be disrespectful to them because they are brothers; rather, they must serve them all the more, because those who benefit from their service are believers and beloved. Teach and exhort these things.


3 If anyone teaches a different doctrine and does not agree with sound words—those of our Lord Jesus Christ—and with the teaching that accords with godliness,
4 he is conceited and understands nothing, but has a sick craving for controversies and disputes about words, from which come envy, strife, slander, evil suspicions,
5 constant friction among men corrupted in mind and deprived of the truth, imagining that godliness is a means of gain.


6 But godliness with contentment is great gain,
7 for we brought nothing into the world, and we cannot take anything out of it.
8 But if we have food and clothing, we should be content with them.
9 But those who desire to be rich fall into temptation and a trap and many foolish and harmful desires, which plunge men into ruin and destruction.
10 For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil, through which some, by craving it, have wandered away from the faith and pierced themselves with many pains.


11 But you, O man of God, flee these things, and pursue righteousness, godliness, faith, love, endurance, and gentleness.
12 Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life to which you were called and about which you made the good confession in the presence of many witnesses.
13 I charge you in the presence of God, who gives life to all things, and of Christ Jesus, who testified the good confession before Pontius Pilate,
14 to keep the commandment without spot or blame until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
15 which he will display at the proper time—he who is the blessed and only Sovereign, the King of kings and Lord of lords,
16 who alone has immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light, whom no man has seen or can see. To him be honor and eternal dominion. Amen.


17 Command those who are rich in the present age not to be arrogant, nor to put their hope in the uncertainty of riches, but in God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy.
18 They are to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous and ready to share,
19 storing up for themselves a good foundation for the future, so that they may take hold of what is truly life.


20 O Timothy, guard what has been entrusted to you. Avoid the irreverent chatter and contradictions of what is falsely called knowledge,
21 which some have professed and thus gone astray from the faith.
Grace be with you.