The Second Epistle of Paul to Timothy


Chapter 1


1 Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God according to the promise of life that is in Christ Jesus,
2 To Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.


3 I give thanks to God, whom I serve with a pure conscience as my forefathers did, as I constantly remember you in my prayers night and day,
4 longing to see you, remembering your tears, so that I may be filled with joy.
5 I am reminded of the sincere faith that is in you, which first dwelt in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice, and I am persuaded is in you also.


6 For this reason I remind you to rekindle the gift of God that is in you through the laying on of my hands.
7 For God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power and love and self-control.


8 Therefore do not be ashamed of the testimony about our Lord, nor of me his prisoner, but share in suffering for the gospel according to the power of God,
9 who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,
10 but now has been revealed through the appearing of our Savior Christ Jesus, who abolished death and brought life and incorruptibility to light through the gospel,
11 for which I was appointed a herald and an apostle and a teacher.


12 For this reason I also suffer these things; but I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have believed, and I am convinced that he is able to guard what has been entrusted to me until that day.


13 Hold to the pattern of sound words that you heard from me, in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
14 Guard the good deposit entrusted to you through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us.


15 You know this, that all who are in Asia turned away from me, among whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
16 May the Lord grant mercy to the household of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chains,
17 but when he was in Rome, he eagerly sought me out and found me.
18 May the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord on that day. And you know very well how much he served in Ephesus.  




Chapter 2


1 You, therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
2 And what you have heard from me through many witnesses, entrust these things to faithful men who will be able to teach others also.


3 Share in suffering as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
4 No one serving as a soldier gets entangled in civilian affairs, so that he may please the one who enlisted him.


5 And if someone competes in athletics, he is not crowned unless he competes according to the rules.


6 It is the hardworking farmer who ought to receive first a share of the crops.


7 Reflect on what I am saying, for the Lord will give you understanding in all things.
8 Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, from the seed of David, according to my gospel,
9 for which I am suffering, even to the point of being chained like a criminal. But the word of God is not chained.
10 For this reason I endure all things for the sake of the elect, so that they also may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.


11 The saying is trustworthy:  
If we died with Him, we shall also live with Him.
12 If we endure, we shall also reign with Him;  
if we deny Him, He also will deny us.
13 If we are faithless, He remains faithful—  
for He cannot deny Himself.


14 Remind them of these things, solemnly charging them before God not to dispute about words, which is of no benefit and leads to the ruin of the hearers.
15 Be diligent to present yourself approved to God as a workman who does not need to be ashamed, rightly handling the word of truth.
16 But avoid profane and empty chatter, for it will lead to more ungodliness,
17 and their message will spread like gangrene. Among them are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
18 who have strayed from the truth, saying that the resurrection has already taken place, and they are upsetting the faith of some.


19 Nevertheless, the firm foundation of God stands, having this seal: “The Lord knows those who are His,” and, “Let everyone who names the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness.”


20 Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and silver but also of wood and clay, and some for honor and some for dishonor.
21 Therefore, if a man cleanses himself from what is dishonorable, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified, useful to the master, prepared for every good work.


22 Flee youthful lusts and pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace, with those who call on the Lord from a pure heart.
23 But refuse foolish and ignorant controversies, knowing that they breed quarrels.


24 And a servant of the Lord must not be quarrelsome, but must be gentle toward all, able to teach, patient when wronged,
25 correcting with gentleness those who oppose him—if perhaps God may grant them repentance leading to the knowledge of the truth,
26 and they may come to their senses and escape the snare of the devil, after being held captive by him to do his will.




Chapter 3


1 But understand this: that in the last days perilous times will come.
2 For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, slanderers, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, unholy,
3 unfeeling, unyielding, slanderous, without self-control, brutal, not lovers of good,
4 treacherous, reckless, puffed up, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God,
5 having a form of godliness but denying its power. Avoid such men as these.


6 For from among them are those who creep into households and captivate weak women weighed down with sins, led along by various desires,
7 always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.


8 And just as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also these kinds of men oppose the truth—men corrupted in mind, disqualified regarding the faith.
9 But they will not progress further, for their folly will be evident to all, as was that of those two men.


10 But you have followed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, endurance,
11 persecutions, sufferings—what befell me in Antioch, in Iconium, in Lystra; what persecutions I endured, and out of all of them the Lord delivered me.
12 Indeed, all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
13 But evil men and impostors will advance from bad to worse, deceiving and being deceived.


14 But you, remain in the things you have learned and were assured of, knowing from whom you learned them,
15 and that from childhood you have known the sacred writings, which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith that is in Christ Jesus.


16 For all Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness,
17 that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work.  




Chapter 4


1 I solemnly charge you before God and Christ Jesus, who is to judge the living and the dead, and by His appearing and His kingdom:
2 Preach the word; be ready in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all patience and instruction.  
3 For the time will come when they will not endure sound teaching, but according to their own desires, they will accumulate for themselves teachers, having itching ears,
4 and they will turn away their ears from the truth and be turned aside to myths.  


5 But you, be sober in all things, endure hardship, do the work of an evangelist, fulfill your ministry.
6 For I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time of my departure has come.
7 I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith.
8 Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give to me on that day, and not only to me but also to all who have loved His appearing.  


9 Make every effort to come to me soon,  
10 for Demas, having loved this present age, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
11 Luke alone is with me. Take Mark and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for ministry.
12 But I have sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
13 When you come, bring the cloak that I left with Carpus at Troas, and the scrolls, especially the parchments.


14 Alexander the coppersmith did me much harm; the Lord will repay him according to his deeds.
15 You also should beware of him, for he greatly opposed our words.
16 At my first defense no one came to stand by me, but all deserted me. May it not be counted against them.
17 But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the message might be fully proclaimed and all the Gentiles might hear. And I was rescued out of the lion’s mouth.
18 The Lord will rescue me from every evil deed and will save me for His heavenly kingdom. To Him be the glory forever and ever. Amen.


19 Greet Prisca and Aquila and the household of Onesiphorus.
20 Erastus remained in Corinth, and I left Trophimus sick in Miletus.
21 Make every effort to come before winter. Eubulus greets you, and so do Pudens and Linus and Claudia and all the brothers.  


22 The Lord be with your spirit. Grace be with you.