The Epistle of Paul to Titus


Chapter 1


1 Paul, a servant of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ for the faith of the elect of God and the knowledge of the truth that accords with godliness,
2 in hope of eternal life, which God, who cannot lie, promised before the ages began,
3 and at the proper time manifested in His word through the proclamation with which I was entrusted according to the command of God our Savior,
4 to Titus, a true son in our common faith: Grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior.


5 For this reason I left you in Crete, that you might set in order what remained and appoint elders in every city as I directed you:
6 if any man is blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful children not accused of dissipation or insubordination.
7 For the overseer must be blameless as a steward of God, not arrogant, not quick-tempered, not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for gain,
8 but hospitable, loving what is good, self-controlled, righteous, holy, disciplined,
9 holding firmly to the trustworthy word as taught, so that he may be able both to encourage with sound teaching and to refute those who contradict.


10 For there are many rebellious men, idle talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision.
11 It is necessary to silence them, since they are upsetting whole households by teaching what they ought not for the sake of dishonest gain.
12 One of them, their own prophet, said, “Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons.”
13 This testimony is true. For this reason, rebuke them sharply, so that they may be sound in the faith,
14 not paying attention to Jewish myths and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.


15 To the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; instead, both their mind and conscience are defiled.
16 They profess to know God, but they deny Him by their works. They are detestable and disobedient and unfit for any good work.




Chapter 2


1 But you, speak what is fitting for sound instruction.
2 Older men are to be temperate, dignified, self-controlled, sound in faith, in love, in endurance.
3 Likewise, older women are to be reverent in behavior, not slanderers or enslaved to much wine, teaching what is good,
4 so that they may encourage the young women to love their husbands and children,
5 to be self-controlled, pure, managing a household, kind, submissive to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be blasphemed.


6 Likewise, urge the young men to be self-controlled in all things,
7 showing yourself as a model of good works, in teaching with integrity, dignity,
8 sound speech that is beyond reproach, so that the opponent may be put to shame, having nothing evil to say about us.


9 Slaves are to be submissive to their own masters in everything, to be well-pleasing, not contradicting them,
10 not pilfering, but showing all good faith, so that they may adorn the teaching of God our Savior in everything.


11 For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,
12 instructing us to deny ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live sensibly, righteously, and godly in the present age,
13 waiting for the blessed hope and the appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ,
14 who gave Himself for us to redeem us from all lawlessness and to purify for Himself a people for His own possession, zealous for good works.


15 Speak these things, and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no one disregard you.




Chapter 3


1 Remind them to be subject to rulers and authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
2 to speak evil of no man, to be peaceable, gentle, showing all courtesy toward all men.
3 For we ourselves also were once foolish, disobedient, led astray, slaves to various desires and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, hating one another.


4 But when the kindness and the love for man of God our Savior appeared,
5 He saved us—not by works of righteousness that we had done but according to His mercy—through the washing of regeneration and renewal by the Holy Spirit,
6 whom He poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior,
7 so that having been justified by His grace, we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.


8 The saying is trustworthy, and I want you to insist on these things, so that those who have believed in God may be careful to devote themselves to good works. These things are good and profitable for men.


9 But avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and strife and quarrels about the Law, for they are unprofitable and worthless.
10 A man who is divisive, after a first and second warning, have nothing more to do with him,
11 knowing that such a man is perverted and sinful, being self-condemned.
12 When I send Artemas to you or Tychicus, do your best to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there.


13 Diligently help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way, so that they lack nothing.
14 And let our men learn to devote themselves to good works to meet pressing needs, so that they may not be unfruitful.


15 All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all.