Philemon


Chapter 1


1 Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon our beloved and fellow worker,
2 and to Apphia our sister, and to Archippus our fellow soldier, and to the church that meets in your house:
3 Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.


4 I give thanks to my God always when I remember you in my prayers,
5 because I hear of your love and the faith that you have toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints,
6 so that the fellowship of your faith may become effective in the knowledge of every good thing that is in us for the sake of Christ.
7 For I have had much joy and encouragement from your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother.


8 Therefore, though I have much boldness in Christ to command you to do what is proper,
9 yet for love’s sake I appeal to you—being such a one as Paul, an old man and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus—
10 I appeal to you concerning my child Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my imprisonment,
11 who formerly was useless to you but now is useful both to you and to me.
12 I am sending him back to you, that is, my very heart,
13 whom I wanted to keep with me, so that on your behalf he might serve me in my imprisonment for the gospel.


14 But without your consent I did not want to do anything, so that your goodness might not be by compulsion but by free will.
15 For perhaps this is why he was separated from you for a time, so that you might have him back forever,
16 no longer as a slave but more than a slave, a beloved brother—especially to me, but how much more to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.


17 If, then, you consider me a partner, receive him as you would me.
18 And if he has wronged you in anything or owes you anything, charge that to my account.


19 I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will repay it. Not to mention that you owe me your very self besides.
20 Yes, brother, may I have joy from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in Christ.


21 Having confidence in your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even more than I say.
22 And at the same time, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be graciously given to you.


23 Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you,
24 as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.


25 The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.