Hebrews


Chapter 1


1 In many places and in many ways, God spoke long ago to the fathers by the prophets,
2 but in these last days He has spoken to us by a Son, whom He appointed heir of all things, through whom also He made the universe.


3 He is the radiance of His glory and the exact imprint of His nature, and He upholds all things by the word of His power. After making purification for sins, He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
4 having become as much superior to the angels as the name He has inherited is more excellent than theirs.


5 For to which of the angels did He ever say,  
“You are My Son; today I have begotten You”?  
And again,  
“I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me a Son”?


6 And again, when He brings the Firstborn into the world, He says,  
“Let all the angels of God worship Him.”


7 And regarding the angels He says,  
“He makes His angels winds,  
and His ministers a flame of fire.”


8 But of the Son He says,  
“Your throne, O God, is forever and ever,  
and the scepter of uprightness is the scepter of Your kingdom.
9 You have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness;  
therefore God, Your God, has anointed You  
with the oil of gladness beyond Your companions.”


10 And,  
“You, Lord, laid the foundation of the earth in the beginning,  
and the heavens are the works of Your hands;
11 they will perish, but You remain;  
they will all wear out like a garment;
12 like a robe You will roll them up,  
like a garment they will be changed.  
But You are the same,  
and Your years will never end.”


13 But to which of the angels has He ever said,  
“Sit at My right hand  
until I make Your enemies a footstool for Your feet”?


14 Are they not all ministering spirits sent out to serve for the sake of those who are about to inherit salvation?




Chapter 2


1 Therefore we must pay much closer attention to what we have heard, so that we do not drift away.
2 For if the word spoken through angels proved firm, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense,
3 how shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation, which at the first was spoken through the Lord, and was confirmed to us by those who heard,
4 God bearing witness with them, both by signs and wonders and various miracles, and by distributions of the Holy Spirit according to His will?


5 For it was not to angels that He subjected the world to come, about which we are speaking.
6 But someone has testified somewhere, saying,  
“What is man, that You remember him,  
or the son of man, that You care for him?
7 You made him lower than the angels for a little while;  
You crowned him with glory and honor;  
You put all things under his feet.”


8 For in subjecting all things to him, He left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him.
9 But we see Jesus, who for a little while was made lower than the angels, crowned with glory and honor because of the suffering of death, so that by the grace of God He might taste death for everyone.
10 For it was fitting for Him, for whom are all things and through whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to perfect the author of their salvation through sufferings.


11 For both the one who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one, for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brothers,
12 saying,  
“I will declare Your name to My brothers;  
in the midst of the assembly I will sing praise to You.”


13 And again,
“I will put my trust in Him.”
And again,
“Behold, I and the children whom God has given Me.”


14 Therefore, since the children share in flesh and blood, He Himself likewise partook of the same, so that through death He might destroy the one who has the power of death—that is, the devil—
15 and free those who through fear of death were subject to slavery all their lives.


16 For surely it is not angels that He helps, but He helps the seed of Abraham.
17 Therefore He had to be made like His brothers in every respect, so that He might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the things pertaining to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
18 For since He Himself suffered when tempted, He is able to help those who are being tempted.




Chapter 3


1 Therefore, holy brothers, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession,
2 who was faithful to the One who appointed Him, just as Moses also was faithful in all His house.
3 For this man has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, just as the builder of a house has more honor than the house itself.
4 For every house is built by someone, but the One who built all things is God.
5 And Moses was faithful in all His house as a servant, to testify to the things that would be spoken later,
6 but Christ was faithful as a Son over His house—whose house we are, if indeed we hold fast our confidence and the boast of our hope firm to the end.


7 Therefore, just as the Holy Spirit says,
“Today, if you hear His voice,
8 do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion,
on the day of testing in the wilderness,
9 where your fathers tried Me by testing Me,
and saw My works for forty years.
10 Therefore I was angry with that generation,
and said, ‘They always go astray in their heart;
and they have not known My ways.’
11 As I swore in My wrath,
‘They shall not enter My rest.’”


12 Watch out, brothers, lest there be in any one of you an evil, unbelieving heart that falls away from the living God.
13 But exhort one another every day, as long as it is called “Today,” so that none of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
14 For we have become partakers of Christ, if indeed we hold fast the beginning of our assurance firm to the end,
15 as it is said,
“Today, if you hear His voice, do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.”


16 For who were those who heard and rebelled? Was it not all those who came out of Egypt through Moses?
17 And with whom was He angry for forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose corpses fell in the wilderness?
18 And to whom did He swear that they would not enter His rest, except to those who were disobedient?
19 And so we see that they were not able to enter because of unbelief.




Chapter 4


1 Therefore, let us fear, so that while a promise remains of entering His rest, none of you may seem to have fallen short of it.
2 For indeed we have had the good news proclaimed to us just as they did; but the word they heard did not benefit them, because it was not united by faith with those who heard.
3 For we who have believed are entering that rest, just as He has said,
“As I swore in My wrath,
‘They shall not enter My rest,’”
although His works were finished from the foundation of the world.
4 For He has spoken somewhere about the seventh day in this way: “And God rested on the seventh day from all His works.”
5 And again in this passage: “They shall not enter My rest.”
6 Therefore, since it remains for some to enter it, and those who formerly had the good news proclaimed to them failed to enter because of disobedience,
7 He again designates a certain day — “Today” — saying through David after so long a time, as has been said before,
“Today, if you hear His voice,
do not harden your hearts.”
8 For if Joshua had given them rest, He would not have spoken afterward about another day.
9 So then, there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God.


10 For the one who has entered His rest has also rested from his works, just as God did from His.
11 Let us therefore strive to enter that rest, so that no one may fall by following the same pattern of disobedience.
12 For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any double-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and spirit, of joints and marrow, and able to judge the thoughts and intentions of the heart.


13 And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are uncovered and laid bare to the eyes of Him to whom we must give account.
14 Therefore, since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens — Jesus the Son of God — let us hold fast to our confession.
15 For we do not have a high priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but One who has been tempted in all things as we are, yet without sin.
16 Therefore, let us approach the throne of grace with boldness, so that we may receive mercy and find grace for help in time of need.




Chapter 5


1 For every high priest taken from among men is appointed on behalf of men in matters pertaining to God, in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
2 He is able to deal gently with the ignorant and misguided, since he himself is also beset with weakness,
3 and because of it he is obligated to offer sacrifices for sins: both for the people, and also for himself.
4 And no one takes the honor to himself, but receives it when called by God, just as Aaron also was.


5 So also Christ did not glorify Himself to become high priest, but the One who said to Him, “You are My Son, today I have begotten You”;
6 just as He also says in another place, “You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.”


7 In the days of His flesh, He offered up both prayers and supplications with loud crying and tears to the One able to save Him from death, and He was heard because of His reverence.
8 Although He was a Son, He learned obedience from what He suffered.
9 And having been perfected, He became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey Him,
10 being designated by God as high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.


11 Concerning him we have much to say, and it is hard to explain, since you have become dull of hearing.
12 For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you have need again for someone to teach you the elementary principles of the oracles of God, and you have come to need milk and not solid food.
13 For everyone who partakes only of milk is unacquainted with the word of righteousness, for he is an infant.
14 But solid food is for the mature, who because of practice have their senses trained to distinguish between good and evil.


Chapter 6


1 Therefore, leaving the elementary teaching about the Christ, let us press on to maturity, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God,
2 of instruction about washings and laying on of hands, and the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment.
3 And this we will do, if God permits.
4 For it is impossible, in the case of those who have once been enlightened and have tasted the heavenly gift and have become partakers of the Holy Spirit,
5 and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come,
6 and then have fallen away, to renew them again to repentance, since they are crucifying again for themselves the Son of God and holding Him up to contempt.


7 For ground that drinks the rain which often falls on it and produces vegetation useful to those for whose sake it is cultivated receives a blessing from God;
8 but if it yields thorns and thistles, it is worthless and near to being cursed, and its end is to be burned.
9 But we are convinced of better things concerning you, beloved, things that belong to salvation, even though we speak in this way.


10 For God is not unjust so as to forget your work and the love you have shown toward His name, having ministered and still ministering to the saints.
11 And we desire each one of you to demonstrate the same diligence toward the full assurance of hope until the end,
12 so that you will not be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
13 For when God made a promise to Abraham, since He could swear by no one greater, He swore by Himself,
14 saying, “Surely I will bless you and multiply you.”
15 And so, having patiently waited, he obtained the promise.


16 For men swear by one greater than themselves, and with them an oath serves as confirmation and puts an end to every dispute.
17 In the same way, God, desiring even more to show to the heirs of the promise the unchangeable nature of His purpose, guaranteed it with an oath,
18 so that by two unchangeable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled for refuge might have strong encouragement to seize the hope set before us.
19 This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast and entering within the veil,
20 where Jesus has entered as a forerunner for us, having become a high priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.




Chapter 7


1 For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
2 and to him Abraham apportioned a tenth of everything. He is first, by translation of his name, king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace.
3 He is without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but resembling the Son of God, he remains a priest forever.


4 Now consider how great this man was: even Abraham the patriarch gave him a tenth of the spoils.
5 And those from the sons of Levi who receive the priestly office have a command according to the Law to take tithes from the people, that is, from their brothers, though these also are descended from Abraham.
6 But this man, who did not trace his lineage from them, received tithes from Abraham and blessed the one who had the promises.
7 Now without any dispute, the lesser is blessed by the greater.
8 And in one case, mortal men receive tithes, but in the other, they are received by one of whom it is testified that he lives.
9 And, so to speak, Levi too, who receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham,
10 for he was still in the loins of his ancestor when Melchizedek met him.


11 Now if perfection had been attainable through the Levitical priesthood—for under it the people received the Law—what further need would there have been for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek, rather than one designated according to the order of Aaron?
12 For when there is a change in the priesthood, there is necessarily a change in the Law as well.
13 For the one concerning whom these things are spoken belongs to another tribe, from which no one has served at the altar.
14 For it is evident that our Lord was descended from Judah, a tribe about which Moses spoke nothing concerning priests.
15 And this is even more clear if another priest arises according to the likeness of Melchizedek,
16 who has become such not according to a law of physical requirement, but according to the power of an indestructible life.
17 For it is testified: “You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.”


18 For on the one hand, a former commandment is set aside because of its weakness and uselessness
19 (for the Law made nothing perfect), and on the other hand, a better hope is introduced, through which we draw near to God.


20 And it was not without an oath. For those who formerly became priests were made so without an oath,
21 but this One was made a priest with an oath, by the One who said to Him,
“The Lord has sworn and will not change His mind: ‘You are a priest forever.’”
22 In this way Jesus has become the guarantor of a better covenant.


23 Also, the former priests were many in number because they were prevented by death from continuing in office,
24 but He holds His priesthood permanently, because He continues forever.
25 Therefore He is able to save completely those who draw near to God through Him, since He lives without dying in order to be able to intercede for them.


26 For such a high priest was indeed fitting for us—holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, and exalted above the heavens.
27 He does not need, as those high priests do, to offer sacrifices daily, first for His own sins and then for those of the people, since this He did once for all when He offered up Himself.
28 For the Law appoints men as high priests who are weak, but the word of the oath, which came after the Law, appoints a Son who has been made perfect forever.




Chapter 8


1 Now the main point in what we are saying is this: we have such a high priest, who sat down at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
2 a minister in the sanctuary and the true tent, which the Lord pitched, not man.


3 For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices; hence it is necessary for this one also to have something to offer.
4 Now if He were on earth, He would not be a priest at all, since there are those who offer the gifts according to the Law,
5 which gifts serve as a copy and shadow of the heavenly things, just as Moses was warned when he was about to construct the tabernacle. For He said, “See that you make everything according to the pattern shown to you on the mountain.”


6 But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, since He is also the mediator of a better covenant, which has been enacted on better promises.


7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, no place would have been sought for a second.
8 For finding fault with them, He says:
“Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord,
when I will establish a new covenant with the house of Israel
and with the house of Judah,
9 not like the covenant that I made with their fathers
on the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt.
For they did not continue in My covenant,
and I disregarded them, says the Lord.
10 For this is the covenant that I will establish with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord:
I will put My laws into their minds
and I will write them upon their hearts.
And I will be their God,
and they shall be My people.
11 And they shall not teach each one his fellow citizen
and each one his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’
for they shall all know Me,
from the least of them to the greatest.
12 For I will be merciful toward their wrongdoings,
and their sins I will remember no more.”


13 In speaking of a new covenant, He has made the first obsolete; and what is becoming obsolete and growing old is about to disappear.




Chapter 9


1 Now indeed even the first covenant had regulations for worship and an earthly sanctuary.
2 For a tent was prepared, the first room in which were the lampstand and the table and the presentation of the bread; it is called the Holy Place.
3 And after the second curtain was a tent called the Most Holy Place,
4 having a golden altar of incense and the ark of the covenant covered on all sides with gold, in which were a golden jar holding the manna, and Aaron’s rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant.
5 And above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat. But of these things we cannot now speak in detail.


6 Now with these things thus prepared, the priests continually enter the first room, performing their regular duties.
7 But into the second only the high priest enters, once a year, and not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the unintentional sins of the people.
8 By this the Holy Spirit indicates that the way into the Most Holy Place is not yet revealed while the first tent is still standing.
9 This is a symbol for the present time, according to which gifts and sacrifices are offered that cannot perfect the conscience of the worshiper,
10 but deal only with food and drink and various washings, regulations for the body imposed until a time of reformation.


11 But Christ, having come as high priest of the good things that have come, through the greater and more perfect tent that was not made with hands (that is, the one that is not of this creation),
12 has entered once for all into the Most Holy Place, not by means of the blood of goats and calves, but by means of his own blood, thus securing eternal redemption.
13 For if the blood of goats and bulls and the ashes of a heifer sprinkled on those who are defiled, cleanse for the purification of the flesh,
14 how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse our conscience from dead works to serve the living God?


15 And for this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that, since a death has occurred for redemption from the transgressions committed under the first covenant, those who are called might receive the promised eternal inheritance.
16 For where there is a will, it is necessary to establish the death of the one who made it.
17 For a will is valid only when someone has died, since it is never in force while the one who made it is still alive.
18 Therefore not even the first covenant was inaugurated without blood.
19 For when every commandment of the law had been declared by Moses to all the people, he took the blood of calves and goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
20 saying, “This is the blood of the covenant that God has commanded for you.”
21 And in the same way he sprinkled with the blood both the tent and all the vessels used in worship.
22 Indeed, under the law almost everything is purified with blood, and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness.


23 Therefore since it was necessary for the copies of the things in the heavens to be purified with such things, the heavenly things themselves had to be purified with better sacrifices than the former things.
24 For Christ did not enter into a sanctuary made with hands, a copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf.
25 Nor does he offer himself again and again, as the high priest enters the Most Holy Place year by year with blood that is not his own,
26 for then he would have had to suffer repeatedly since the foundation of the world. But now he has appeared once for all at the end of the ages to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
27 And just as it is appointed for man to die once, and after that comes judgment,
28 so also Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to deal with sin, but to save those who eagerly await him.




Chapter 10


1 For the law, having a shadow of the good things to come and not the original image of those things, can never, by the same sacrifices that they continually offer year by year, make those who draw near to be perfect.
2 Otherwise, would they not have ceased to be offered, since the worshipers, once cleansed, would have had no more consciousness of sins?
3 But in these sacrifices there is a reminder of sins year after year.


4 For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
5 Therefore, when He comes into the world, He says, “Sacrifice and offering You did not desire, but a body You prepared for Me;
6 in burnt offerings and offerings for sin You took no pleasure.
7 Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come— in the scroll of the book it is written of Me— to do Your will, O God.’”


8 After saying the above, “Sacrifices and offerings and burnt offerings and offerings for sin You did not desire nor took pleasure in them” (which are offered according to the law),
9 then He said, “Behold, I have come to do Your will.” He takes away the first in order to establish the second.
10 By this will, we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.


11 And every priest stands day after day ministering and offering repeatedly the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins.
12 But this One, having offered one sacrifice for sins for all time, sat down at the right hand of God,
13 waiting from then on until His enemies are made a footstool for His feet.
14 For by one offering He has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified.


15 And the Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying,
16 “This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, says the Lord: I will put My laws on their hearts, and I will write them on their minds,”
17 He also adds, “Their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more.”
18 Now where there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering for sin.


19 Therefore, brothers, since we have confidence for the entrance into the Most Holy Place by the blood of Jesus,
20 by the new and living way which He opened for us through the curtain—that is, His flesh—
21 and since we have a great priest over the house of God,
22 let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water.
23 Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for He who promised is faithful.
24 And let us consider how to stir up one another to love and good works,
25 not neglecting to meet together, as is the habit of some, but encouraging one another—and all the more as you see the Day drawing near.


26 For if we sin deliberately after receiving the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins,
27 but a fearful expectation of judgment and a fury of fire that is about to consume the adversaries.
28 Anyone who has rejected the law of Moses dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses.
29 How much worse punishment do you think one will deserve who has trampled underfoot the Son of God, and has regarded as profane the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and has insulted the Spirit of grace?
30 For we know the One who said, “Vengeance is Mine; I will repay,” and again, “The Lord will judge His people.”
31 It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


32 But remember the former days in which, after being enlightened, you endured a great conflict of sufferings—
33 partly being publicly exposed both to insults and afflictions, and partly becoming sharers with those who were treated in this way.
34 For you sympathized with those in prison and accepted with joy the seizure of your possessions, knowing that you yourselves have a better and abiding possession.
35 Therefore do not throw away your confidence, which has great reward.
36 For you have need of endurance, so that when you have done the will of God you may receive what is promised.


37 “For yet a little while, the Coming One will come and will not delay;
38 but My righteous one shall live by faith, and if he draws back, My soul has no pleasure in him.”


39 But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, but of those who have faith to the preservation of the soul.




Chapter 11


1 Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen.  
2 For by it the men of old received commendation.  
3 By faith we understand that the universe was formed by the word of God, so that what is seen was not made out of things that are visible.  


4 By faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, through which he was attested as righteous, God bearing witness to his gifts; and through faith, though he is dead, he still speaks.  
5 By faith Enoch was taken up so that he would not see death, and he was not found, because God had taken him; for before he was taken he was commended as having pleased God.  


6 Now without faith it is impossible to please Him, for whoever approaches God must believe that He exists and that He rewards those who seek Him.  
7 By faith Noah, being warned by God concerning events as yet unseen, with reverent fear prepared an ark for the salvation of his household; by this he condemned the world and became an heir of the righteousness that comes by faith.  


8 By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place that he was to receive as an inheritance; and he went out, not knowing where he was going.  
9 By faith he dwelled in the land of promise as in a foreign land, living in tents with Isaac and Jacob, fellow heirs of the same promise.  
10 For he was looking forward to the city that has foundations, whose architect and builder is God.  


11 By faith Sarah herself received power to conceive, even though she was past the proper age, since she regarded Him faithful who had promised.  
12 Therefore from one man, and him as good as dead, were born descendants as numerous as the stars of heaven and as countless as the sand on the seashore.  


13 These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them and greeted them from afar, and having acknowledged that they were strangers and exiles on the earth.  
14 For those who speak in this way make it clear that they are seeking a homeland.  
15 If they had been thinking of the land from which they had gone out, they would have had opportunity to return.  
16 But as it is, they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed to be called their God, for He has prepared a city for them.  


17 By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac; and he who had received the promises was in the act of offering up his only son,  
18 to whom it had been said, “Through Isaac your descendants shall be named.”  
19 He considered that God was able even to raise him from the dead, from which, figuratively speaking, he did receive him back.  


20 By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come.  
21 By faith Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and bowed in worship over the head of his staff.  
22 By faith Joseph, at the end of his life, made mention of the exodus of the sons of Israel and gave instructions concerning his bones.  


23 By faith Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw that the child was beautiful, and they were not afraid of the king’s edict.  
24 By faith Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,  
25 choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to enjoy the temporary pleasures of sin.  
26 He considered the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking to the reward.  


27 By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the king’s anger, for he endured as seeing Him who is invisible.  
28 By faith he kept the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that the destroyer of the firstborn would not touch them.  


29 By faith they crossed the Red Sea as on dry land, but the Egyptians, when they attempted to do the same, were swallowed up.  


30 By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they had been encircled for seven days.  
31 By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish with those who were disobedient, because she had welcomed the spies in peace.  


32 And what more shall I say? For time would fail me to tell of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, and Samuel and the prophets—  
33 who through faith conquered kingdoms, enforced justice, obtained promises, shut the mouths of lions,  
34 quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, were made strong out of weakness, became mighty in war, put foreign armies to flight.  


35 Women received back their dead by resurrection. Some were tortured, refusing release so that they might gain a better resurrection.  
36 Others suffered mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment.  
37 They were stoned, they were sawn in two, they were killed with the sword; they went about in sheepskins and goatskins, destitute, afflicted, mistreated—  
38 of whom the world was not worthy—wandering in deserts and mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.  


39 And all these, though they were commended through their faith, did not receive what was promised,  
40 because God had provided something better for us, so that apart from us they should not be made perfect.




Chapter 12


1 Therefore, since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, let us also lay aside every weight, and the sin that so easily entangles, and let us run with endurance the race that is set before us,  
2 fixing our eyes on Jesus, the founder and perfecter of faith, who for the joy set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.  


3 Consider Him who endured from sinners such hostility against Himself, so that you may not grow weary or lose heart.  


4 In your struggle against sin you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding your blood.  
5 And you have forgotten the exhortation that addresses you as sons:  
“My son, do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord,  
nor grow weary when you are reproved by Him;  
6 for the Lord disciplines the one He loves,  
and chastises every son whom He receives.”  


7 It is for discipline that you endure. God is treating you as sons. For what son is there whom his father does not discipline?  
8 But if you are without discipline, of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate children and not sons.  
9 Furthermore, we had earthly fathers who disciplined us, and we respected them. Shall we not much more be subject to the Father of spirits and live?  
10 For they disciplined us for a short time as it seemed best to them, but He disciplines us for our benefit, that we may share in His holiness.  
11 All discipline for the moment seems not to be joyful but painful; yet afterward it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.  


12 Therefore, strengthen the hands that are weak and the knees that are feeble,  
13 and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be put out of joint, but rather be healed.  


14 Pursue peace with all men, and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord.  
15 See to it that no one falls short of the grace of God, and that no root of bitterness springing up causes trouble, and by it many become defiled;  
16 that no one is sexually immoral or profane like Esau, who sold his birthright for a single meal.  
17 For you know that afterward, when he wanted to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no opportunity for repentance, though he sought it with tears.  


18 For you have not come to what may be touched, to a blazing fire and darkness and gloom and whirlwind,  
19 and the sound of a trumpet and a voice whose words made those who heard it beg that no further message be spoken to them,  
20 for they could not bear what was commanded: “If even a beast touches the mountain, it shall be stoned.”  
21 Indeed, the sight was so terrifying that Moses said, “I tremble with fear.”  


22 But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of angels in festive assembly,  
23 and to the assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of the righteous who have been made perfect,  
24 and to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word than the blood of Abel.  


25 See that you do not refuse Him who is speaking. For if they did not escape when they refused Him who warned them on earth, how much less will we escape if we turn away from Him who warns from heaven.  
26 His voice then shook the earth, but now He has promised, saying, “Yet once more I will shake not only the earth but also the heaven.”  
27 Now this phrase, “Yet once more,” indicates the removal of what can be shaken—that is, created things—so that what cannot be shaken may remain.  


28 Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, let us be thankful, and so offer to God acceptable worship with reverence and awe.  
29 For our God is a consuming fire.




Chapter 13


1 Let brotherly love continue.
2 Do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers, for by doing so some have entertained angels without knowing it.
3 Remember those in prison, as though you were in prison with them, and those who are mistreated, since you yourselves are in the body.


4 Let marriage be honored among all, and the marriage bed undefiled; for God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.


5 Keep your life free from the love of money, and be content with what you have, for He has said, “I will never leave you, nor will I forsake you.”
6 So we say with confidence, “The Lord is my helper; I will not fear; what can man do to me?”


7 Remember your leaders, those who spoke to you the word of God. Consider the outcome of their way of life, and imitate their faith.
8 Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.
9 Do not be led away by various and strange teachings, for it is good for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by foods, which have not benefited those devoted to them.


10 We have an altar from which those who serve in the tent have no right to eat.
11 For the bodies of those animals whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest as a sacrifice for sin are burned outside the camp.
12 So Jesus also suffered outside the gate in order to sanctify the people through His own blood.
13 Therefore let us go to Him outside the camp, bearing His reproach.
14 For here we have no lasting city, but we seek the city that is to come.


15 Through Him, therefore, let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that confess His name.
16 Do not neglect doing good and sharing, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.


17 Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they keep watch over your souls as those who will give an account, so that they may do this with joy and not with groaning, for that would be of no benefit to you.


18 Pray for us, for we are convinced that we have a clear conscience, desiring to conduct ourselves honorably in all things.
19 I urge you all the more to do this, so that I may be restored to you sooner.


20 Now may the God of peace, who brought up from the dead our Lord Jesus—the great Shepherd of the sheep—by the blood of the everlasting covenant,
21 equip you with every good thing to do His will, working in us what is pleasing before Him, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen.


22 I appeal to you, brothers, bear with my word of exhortation, for I have written to you briefly.
23 Know that our brother Timothy has been released, with whom, if he comes soon, I will see you.
24 Greet all your leaders and all the saints. Those from Italy greet you.
25 Grace be with you all.