The First Epistle of Peter

Chapter 1

1 Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen sojourners scattered througout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
2 according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, by sanctification of the Spirit, for obedience and sprinkling with the blood of Jesus Christ: Grace and peace be multiplied to you.

3 Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to His great mercy has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
4 to an inheritance imperishable and undefiled and unfading, kept in heaven for you,
5 who by God’s power are being guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the time of the end.

6 In this you rejoice, though now for a little while, if necessary, you have been grieved by various trials,
7 so that the tested genuineness of your faith—more precious than gold that perishes, though tested by fire—may be found to result in praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
8 Though you have not seen Him, you love Him; and though you do not now see Him, yet believing, you rejoice with joy inexpressible and full of glory,
9 receiving the outcome of your faith, the salvation of your souls.

10 Concerning this salvation, the prophets who prophesied of the grace that was to be yours sought and inquired carefully,
11 inquiring into what person or time the Spirit of Christ in them was indicating when He testified beforehand to the sufferings of Christ and the glories after these.
12 It was revealed to them that they were serving not themselves but you, in the things that have now been announced to you through those who preached the gospel to you by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven—things into which angels long to look.

13 Therefore, gird up the loins of your mind, be sober-minded, and set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
14 As obedient children, do not be conformed to the former desires in your ignorance,
15 but as He who called you is holy, you also, be holy in all your conduct,
16 because it is written, “You shall be holy, for I am holy.”

17 And if you call on Him as Father who judges impartially according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves with fear during the time of your sojourning,
18 knowing that you were ransomed from your futile way of life handed down from your forefathers, though not with perishable things such as silver or gold,
19 but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of a lamb without blemish and without spot.
20 He was foreknown before the foundation of the world, but was revealed in the last times for your sake,
21 who through Him believe in God, who raised Him from the dead and gave Him glory, so that your faith and hope might be in God.

22 Having purified your souls by obedience to the truth for a sincere brotherly love, love one another earnestly from a pure heart,
23 having been born again, not of perishable seed but of imperishable, through the living and abiding word of God;
24 for,
“All flesh is like grass, and all its glory like the flower of grass.
The grass withers, and the flower falls,
25 but the word of the Lord endures forever.”
And this is the word that was preached to you.


Chapter 2

1 So put away all malice and all deceit and hypocrisy and envy and all slander.
2 Like newborn infants, long for the pure spiritual milk, that by it you may grow up into salvation—
3 if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is good.

4 As you come to Him, a living stone rejected by men but chosen and honored by God,
5 you also, like living stones, are being built up as a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
6 For it says in Scripture:
“Behold, I am laying in Zion a cornerstone, chosen and precious,
and whoever believes in Him shall not be put to shame.”
7 So the honor is for you who believe,
but for those who do not believe,
“The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone,”
8 and,
“A stone of stumbling,
and a rock of offense.”
They stumble because they disobey the word, as they were destined to do.

9 But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, so that you may proclaim the excellencies of Him who called you out of darkness into His marvelous light.
10 Once you were not a people,
but now you are God’s people;
once you had not received mercy,
but now you have received mercy.

11 Beloved, I urge you as sojourners and exiles to abstain from the passions of the flesh, which wage war against the soul.
12 Keep your conduct among the Gentiles honorable, so that when they speak against you as evildoers, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day of visitation.

13 Be subject for the Lord’s sake to every human institution, whether to a king as supreme,
14 or to governors as those sent by him to punish those who do evil and to praise those who do good.
15 For this is the will of God, that by doing good you should silence the ignorance of foolish men.
16 Live as free men, not using your freedom as a cover-up for evil, but as servants of God.
17 Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king.

18 Servants, be subject to your masters with all respect, not only to the good and gentle but also to the unjust.
19 For this is a gracious thing, when, mindful of God, one endures sorrows while suffering unjustly.
20 For what credit is it if, when you sin and are beaten for it, you endure? But if when you do good and suffer for it you endure, this is a gracious thing in the sight of God.

21 For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so that you might follow in His steps.
22 He committed no sin, neither was deceit found in His mouth.
23 When He was reviled, He did not revile in return; when He suffered, He did not threaten, but continued entrusting Himself to Him who judges justly.
24 He Himself bore our sins in His body on the tree, that we might die to sin and live to righteousness. By His wounds you were healed.
25 For you were going astray like sheep, but have now returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.


Chapter 3

1 Likewise, wives, be subject to your own husbands, so that even if some do not obey the word, they may be won without a word by the conduct of their wives,
2 when they see your respectful and pure conduct.
3 Do not let your adornment be external—as in the braiding of hair, wearing of gold, or putting on of fine clothing—
4 but let it be the hidden man of the heart, with the imperishable beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is very precious.
5 For this is how the holy women who hoped in God used to adorn themselves,
by being subject to their own husbands,
6 just as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord. And you are her children if you do good and do not fear anything that is frightening.

7 Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the weaker vessel, since they are heirs with you of the grace of life, so that your prayers may not be hindered.

8 Finally, all of you, be like-minded, sympathetic, loving as brothers, tenderhearted, and humble.
9 Do not repay evil for evil or insult for insult, but on the contrary, bless, for to this you were called, that you may inherit a blessing.
10 For,
“Whoever desires to love life and see good days,
let him keep his tongue from evil and his lips from speaking deceit;
11 let him turn away from evil and do good;
let him seek peace and pursue it.
12 For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous,
and His ears are open to their prayer.
But the face of the Lord is against those who do evil.”

13 Now who is there to harm you if you are zealous for what is good?
14 But even if you should suffer for righteousness’ sake, you are blessed. “Do not fear what they fear, nor be troubled,”
15 but in your hearts honor Christ the Lord as holy, always being prepared to make a defense to anyone who asks you for a reason for the hope that is in you; yet do it with gentleness and respect,
16 having a good conscience, so that when you are slandered, those who revile your good conduct in Christ may be put to shame.
17 For it is better to suffer for doing good, if that should be God’s will than for doing evil.

18 For Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit,
19 in which also He went and proclaimed to the spirits in prison,
20 because they formerly did not obey, when God’s patience waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared, in which a few—that is, eight persons—were brought safely through water.
21 Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you—not as a removal of dirt from the body, but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
22 who has gone into heaven and is at the right hand of God, with angels, authorities, and powers having been subjected to Him.


Chapter 4

1 Therefore, since Christ suffered in the flesh, arm yourselves also with the same purpose—because the one who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin—
2 so as to live the rest of his time in the flesh no longer for the lusts of men, but for the will of God.
3 For the time that has passed is sufficient to have carried out the desire of the Gentiles, having pursued a course of sensuality, lusts, drunkenness, carousing, drinking parties, and lawless idolatries.

4 In this they are surprised that you do not run with them into the same excess of recklessness, and they slander you;
5 but they will give account to Him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.

6 For this is why the gospel was proclaimed even to the dead, so that though judged in the flesh as men, they might live in the spirit according to God.
7 But the end of all things is near; therefore be sound-minded and sober for the sake of prayers.

8 Above all, keep fervent in your love for one another, because love covers a multitude of sins.
9 Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.

10 Just as each has received a gift, use it to serve one another as good stewards of the varied grace of God:
11 if anyone speaks, as one speaking the oracles of God; if anyone serves, as from the strength which God supplies, so that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ—to whom belong the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.

12 Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery trial among you, which comes upon you for testing, as though something strange were happening to you,
13 but to the extent you share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice, so that at the revelation of His glory you may also rejoice with exultation.
14 If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.

15 Let none of you suffer as a murderer or a thief or an evildoer or as a meddler.
16 But if anyone suffers as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that name.

17 For it is time for judgment to begin with the household of God; and if it begins with us, what will be the outcome for those who do not obey the gospel of God?
18 And if the righteous person is saved with difficulty, what will become of the ungodly person and the sinner?

19 Therefore let those also who suffer according to the will of God entrust their souls to a faithful Creator while doing good.


Chapter 5

1 Therefore I exhort the elders among you, as a fellow elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a sharer in the glory that is to be revealed:
2 shepherd the flock of God among you, not under compulsion, but willingly, as God desires; not for shameful gain, but eagerly;
3 not as lording it over those allotted to you, but as becoming examples to the flock.
4 And when the chief Shepherd appears, you will receive the unfading crown of glory.

5 Likewise, you younger men, be subject to the elders. And all of you, clothe yourselves with humility toward one another, because “God opposes the proud, but gives grace to the humble.”
6 Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God, so that He may exalt you at the proper time,
7 casting all your anxiety on Him, because He cares for you.

8 Be sober-minded; be watchful. Your adversary the devil walks about like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.
9 Resist him, being firm in the faith, knowing that the same sufferings are being experienced by your brothers throughout the world.
10 And after you have suffered a little while, the God of all grace, who called you to His eternal glory in Christ, will Himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you.
11 To Him be the dominion forever and ever. Amen.

12 Through Silvanus, a faithful brother as I consider him, I have written briefly, exhorting and testifying that this is the true grace of God. Stand firm in it.
13 She who is in Babylon, chosen together with you, greets you, and so does Mark, my son.
14 Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace to you all who are in Christ.

