The First Epistle of John

Chapter 1

1 What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we have looked at and our hands have touched—concerning the Word of life—
2 and the life was revealed, and we have seen and testify and declare to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was revealed to us—
3 what we have seen and heard we declare to you also, so that you too may have fellowship with us; and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ.
4 And we write these things so that our joy may be complete.

5 And this is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you: that God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all.
6 If we say that we have fellowship with Him and yet walk in darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth.
7 But if we walk in the light as He Himself is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus His Son cleanses us from all sin.

8 If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
9 If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
10 If we say that we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us.


Chapter 2

1 My little children, I am writing these things to you so that you may not sin. And if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father—Jesus Christ the righteous.
2 And He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only but also for the sins of the whole world.

3 And by this we know that we have come to know Him, if we keep His commandments.
4 Whoever says, “I have come to know Him,” and does not keep His commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
5 But whoever keeps His word, truly in him the love of God has been perfected. By this we know that we are in Him.
6 Whoever says he abides in Him ought also to walk in the same way in which He walked.

7 Beloved, I am not writing a new commandment to you, but an old commandment that you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that you have heard.
8 Again, I am writing a new commandment to you, which is true in Him and in you, because the darkness is passing away and the true light is already shining.
9 Whoever says he is in the light and hates his brother is still in darkness.
10 Whoever loves his brother abides in the light, and in him there is no cause for stumbling.
11 But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks in the darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.

12 I am writing to you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you, for His name’s sake.
13 I am writing to you, fathers, because you have known Him, who is from the beginning.
I am writing to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one.
I have written to you, children, because you have known the Father.
14 I have written to you, fathers, because you have known Him, who is from the beginning.
I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the evil one.

15 Do not love the world nor the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
16 For all that is in the world—the desire of the flesh and the desire of the eyes and the pride of life—is not from the Father but is from the world.
17 And the world is passing away, along with its desire, but the one who does the will of God abides forever.

18 Children, it is the last hour, and just as you heard that antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have come. From this we know that it is the last hour.
19 They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been with us, they would have remained with us. But they went out so that it might be made clear that none of them are with us.

20 But you have an anointing from the Holy One, as you all know.
21 I have not written to you because you do not know the truth, but because do you know it, and because there is no lie with the truth.
22 Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist: the one who denies the Father and the Son.
23 Everyone who denies the Son does not have the Father; the one who confesses the Son also has the Father.

24 As for you, let what you heard from the beginning abide in you. If what you heard from the beginning abides in you, then you also will abide in the Son and in the Father.
25 And this is the promise that He Himself made to us: eternal life.

26 I have written these things to you concerning those who are trying to deceive you.
27 And as for you, the anointing that you received from Him abides in you, and you have no need that anyone should teach you. But as His anointing teaches you about all things—and is true and not a lie, and just as it has taught you—you abide in Him.

28 And now, little children, abide in Him, so that when He appears we may have confidence and not shrink away from Him in shame at His coming.
29 If you know that He is righteous, you also know that everyone who practices righteousness has been born of Him.


Chapter 3

1 See what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we should not only be called children of God, but really be such. Because of this the world does not know us, since it did not know Him.
2 Beloved, now we are children of God, and what we will be has not yet been revealed. We know that when He is revealed, we will be like Him, because we will see Him as He is.
3 And everyone who has this hope in Him purifies himself, just as He is pure.

4 Everyone who practices sin also practices lawlessness, because sin is breaking the law.
5 And you know that He was revealed in order to take away sins, and in Him there is no sin.
6 Everyone who abides in Him does not keep on sinning; while everyone who keeps on sinning has not seen or known Him.

7 Little children, let no one deceive you. The one who practices righteousness is righteous, just as He is righteous.
8 The one who practices sin is of the devil, because the devil has been sinning from the beginning. And it is for the purpose of destroying the works of the devil that the Son of God was revealed.
9 No one who has been born of God practices sin, because His seed abides in him; and he cannot keep on sinning, because he has been born of God.
10 By this the children of God and the children of the devil are differentiated: everyone who does not practice righteousness is not of God, and neither is the one who does not love his brother.

11 For this is the message that you have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another—
12 not as Cain, who was of the evil one and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his deeds were evil and his brother’s were righteous.

13 So, brothers, do not be surprised, if the world hates you.
14 We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren. Whoever does not love abides in death.
15 Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.

16 By this we know love, that He laid down His life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
17 But whoever has the world’s goods and sees his brother in need and closes his heart against him—how does the love of God abide in him?

18 Little children, let us not love with word or with tongue but in action and truth.
19 By this we will know that we are of the truth and will assure our heart before Him,
20 that if our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things.
21 Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us, we have confidence before God;
22 and whatever we ask we receive from Him, because we keep His commandments and do the things that are pleasing in His sight.

23 And this is His commandment: that we believe in the name of His Son Jesus Christ and love one another, just as He commanded us.
24 And the one who keeps His commandments abides in Him, and He in him. And by this we know that He abides in us: by the Spirit whom He gave us.


Chapter 4

1 Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
2 By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God,
3 and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. And this is the spirit of the antichrist, which you heard was coming, and now is already in the world.

4 You are from God, little children, and you have overcome them, because greater is He who is in you than he who is in the world.
5 They are from the world; therefore they speak from the world, and the world listens to them.
6 We are from God. The one who knows God listens to us; the one who is not from God does not listen to us. From this we know the Spirit of truth and the spirit of error.

7 Beloved, let us love one another, because love is from God, and everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God.
8 The one who does not love has not known God, because God is love.
9 By this the love of God was revealed among us, that God sent His only Son into the world, so that we might live through Him.
10 In this is love, not that we loved God, but that He loved us and sent His Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins.

11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another.
12 No one has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God abides in us, and His love is perfected in us.
13 By this we know that we abide in Him and He in us, because He has given us from His Spirit.
14 And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son as the Savior of the world.

15 Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him and he in God.
16 And we have come to know and have believed the love that God has for us. God is love, and the one who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him.

17 By this love is perfected with us, so that we may have confidence on the day of judgment, because as He is, so also are we in this world.
18 There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has to do with punishment. The one who fears has not been perfected in love.
19 We love, because He first loved us.
20 If someone says, “I love God,” and hates his brother, he is a liar. For the one who does not love his brother whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has not seen.
21 And this commandment we have from Him: that the one who loves God must also love his brother.


Chapter 5

1 Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves the Father also loves the one who has been born of Him.
2 By this we know that we love the children of God: when we love God and keep His commandments.
3 For this is the love of God: that we keep His commandments—and His commandments are not burdensome.
4 For everyone who has been born of God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that has overcome the world—our faith.
5 Who is the one who overcomes the world, except the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

6 This is the one who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ—not by the water only but by the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
7 For there are three that testify:
8 the Spirit and the water and the blood, and the three are in agreement.

9 If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater, because this is the testimony of God, that He has testified concerning His Son.
10 The one who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. The one who does not believe God, has made Him into a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified concerning His Son.
11 And this is the testimony: that God gave us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.
12 The one who has the Son has life; the one who does not have the Son of God does not have life.

13 I wrote these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, so that you may know that you have eternal life.
14 And this is the confidence that we have before Him: that if we ask anything according to His will, He hears us.
15 And if we know that He hears us in whatever we ask, we know that we will receive what we have asked from Him.

16 If anyone sees his brother committing a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life—to those committing sin not leading to death. There is sin leading to death; I do not say that he should ask about that.
17 All unrighteousness is sin, and there is sin not leading to death.

18 We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning, but the one who was born of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him.
19 We know that we are from God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
20 And we know that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding so that we may know the true One, and we are in the true One, in His Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life.

21 Little children, guard yourselves from idols.

