Jude

Chapter 1

1 Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James, to those who are called, beloved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ:
2 May mercy and peace and love be multiplied to you.

3 Beloved, although I was very eager to write to you about our common salvation, I felt the necessity to write to you exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith that was once and for all time delivered to the saints.
4 For certain men have crept in unnoticed, those who long ago were designated for this condemnation—ungodly men who pervert the grace of our God into licentiousness and deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus Christ.

5 Now I want to remind you—though you know all things once for all—that Jesus, after saving a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who did not believe.
6 And angels who did not keep their own domain but abandoned their proper dwelling, He has kept in eternal chains under darkness for the judgment of the great day.
7 Just as Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities around them, which likewise indulged in sexual immorality and pursued unnatural desire, are held up as an example by suffering the punishment of eternal destruction.

8 In the same way, these also—relying on dreams—defile the flesh, reject authority, and blaspheme glorious beings.
9 But Michael the archangel, when he disputed with the devil and argued over the body of Moses, did not dare to bring a judgment of slander against him, but said, “The Lord rebuke you!”
10 But these men blaspheme all that they do not understand, and what they do understand by instinct, like irrational animals, they are destroyed by these things.

11 Woe to them! For they have gone in the way of Cain, and abandoned themselves for gain to the error of Balaam, and perished in the rebellion of Korah.
12 These are the hidden reefs in your love feasts, as they feast with you without fear, shepherds feeding only themselves; waterless clouds carried along by winds; fruitless trees in late autumn, twice dead, uprooted;
13 wild waves of the sea, casting up their own shame like foam; wandering stars, for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.

14 And Enoch, the seventh from Adam, also prophesied about these men, saying, “Behold, the Lord came with unnumbered holy angels,
15 to execute judgment on all and to convict all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they have committed in an ungodly way, and of all the harsh things that ungodly sinners have spoken against Him.”

16 These are grumblers, malcontents, following their own lusts. Their mouth speaks arrogant things, flattering others for advantage.

17 But you, beloved, remember the words spoken beforehand by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
18 how they said to you, “In the last time there will be scoffers, following their own ungodly lusts.”
19 These are the ones who cause divisions, worldly-minded, devoid of the Spirit.

20 But you, beloved, building yourselves up in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,
21 keep yourselves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
22 And have mercy on those who doubt,
23 and save others by snatching them out of the fire; and on others show mercy with fear, hating even the garment defiled by the flesh.

24 Now to Him who is able to keep you from stumbling and to present you blameless before the presence of His glory with great joy,
25 to the only God our Savior, through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, dominion, and authority before all time and now and forever. Amen.

