The Revelation of John

Chapter 1

1 The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave Him to show to His servants the things that must soon take place. And He made it known by sending His angel to His servant John,
2 who bore witness to the word of God and to the testimony of Jesus Christ, to all that he saw.
3 Blessed is the one who reads aloud, and those who hear the words of the prophecy and keep the things that are written in it, for the time is near.

4 John, to the seven churches that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from Him who is and who was and who is to come, and from the seven spirits who are before His throne,
5 and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To Him who loves us and released us from our sins by His blood—
6 and He made us a royal priesthood to His God and Father—to Him be glory and power forever and ever. Amen.

7 Behold, He is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see Him—even those who pierced Him—and all the tribes of the earth will wail because of Him. Even so, Amen.
8 “I am the Alpha and the Omega,” says the Lord God, “the One who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.”

9 I, John, your brother and partner in the tribulation and kingdom and endurance in Jesus, was on the island called Patmos because of the word of God and the testimony of Jesus.
10 I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s Day, and I heard behind me a loud voice like a trumpet,
11 saying, “Write what you see on a scroll and send it to the seven churches—to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.”

12 Then I turned to see the voice that was speaking to me, and having turned I saw seven golden lampstands,
13 and in the midst of the lampstands was One like a son of man, clothed in a long robe and girded across His chest with a golden sash.
14 His head and His hair were white like wool, as white as snow, and His eyes were like a flame of fire.
15 His feet were like burnished bronze, refined in a furnace, and His voice was like the sound of many waters.
16 And in His right hand He held seven stars, and out of His mouth came a sharp two-edged sword, and His face was like the sun shining in its full strength.

17 When I saw Him, I fell at His feet as though dead. But He laid His right hand on me, saying, “Do not fear. I am the First and the Last,
18 and the Living One. I was dead, and yet, I am alive forever and ever, and I have the keys of death and of the grave.
19 Therefore write what you have seen, what is now, and what is to take place after this.
20 The mystery of the seven stars that you saw in My right hand, and of the seven golden lampstands: the seven stars are the angels of the seven churches, and the seven lampstands are the seven churches.”


Chapter 2

1 To the angel of the church in Ephesus, write:
These are the words of Him who holds the seven stars in His right hand, who walks among the seven golden lampstands:
2 I know your works, and your toil and your endurance, and that you cannot tolerate evil men. You have tested those who call themselves apostles and are not, and found them to be false.
3 And you have endurance and have borne hardship for My name’s sake, and have not grown weary.
4 But I have this against you, that you have left your first love.
5 Therefore remember where you have fallen from, and repent and do the works you did at first. But if not, I am coming to you and will remove your lampstand from its place, unless you repent.
6 But this you have: that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
7 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who overcomes, I will grant to eat from the tree of life, which is in the paradise of God.

8 And to the angel of the church in Smyrna, write:
These are the words of the First and the Last, who was dead and came to life:
9 I know your tribulation and your poverty (but you are rich), and the slander of those who say they are Jews and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
10 Do not fear what you are about to suffer. For the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested, and you will have tribulation for ten days. Be faithful unto death, and I will give you the crown of life.
11 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. The one who overcomes shall not be hurt by the second death.

12 And to the angel of the church in Pergamum, write:
These are the words of Him who has the sharp two-edged sword:
13 I know where you dwell, where the throne of Satan is; and you are holding fast to My name and did not deny the faith in Me, even in the days of Antipas, My faithful witness, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
14 But I have a few things against you: that you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel—to eat food sacrificed to idols and to commit sexual immorality.
15 So also you have some who hold the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
16 Therefore repent. But if not, I am coming to you quickly, and I will fight against them with the sword of My mouth.
17 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. To the one who overcomes, I will give some of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written which no one knows except the one who receives it.

18 And to the angel of the church in Thyatira, write:
These are the words of the Son of God, who has eyes like a flame of fire and feet like burnished bronze:
19 I know your works, and your love and faith and service and endurance, and that your last works are greater than the first.
20 But I have this against you, that you tolerate that woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess and teaches and deceives My servants to commit sexual immorality and to eat food sacrificed to idols.
21 And I gave her time to repent, but she does not want to repent of her sexual immorality.
22 Behold, I will cast her onto a bed, and those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation, unless they repent of her works.
23 And I will strike her children dead. And all the churches will know that I am He who searches hearts and minds, and I will give to each of you according to your works.

24 But to the rest of you in Thyatira, who do not hold this teaching, who have not known the deep things of Satan, as they call them—I place no other burden on you.
25 Only hold fast what you have until I come.
26 And to the one who overcomes and keeps My works to the end, I will give authority over the nations—
27 and he will rule them with a rod of iron, as when clay pots are broken in pieces—as I also have received from My Father.
28 And I will give him the morning star.
29 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.


Chapter 3

1 And to the angel of the church in Sardis, write:
These are the words of Him who has the seven spirits of God and the seven stars:
I know your works—that you have a name that you are alive, but you are dead.
2 Wake up, and strengthen the things that remain, which are about to die, for I have not found your works complete in the sight of My God.
3 Therefore remember what you have received and heard, and keep it, and repent. But if you do not wake up, I will come like a thief, and you will not know at what hour I will come against you.
4 But you have a few names in Sardis who have not defiled their garments, and they will walk with Me in white, for they are worthy.
5 The one who overcomes will be clothed in white garments, and I will never erase his name from the book of life, and I will confess his name before My Father and before His angels.
6 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

7 And to the angel of the church in Philadelphia write:
These are the words of the Holy One, the True One, who has the key of David, who opens and no one will shut, who shuts and no one opens:
8 I know your works. Behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one can shut, because you have a little strength, and yet you have kept My word and have not denied My name.
9 Behold, I will make those of the synagogue of Satan—those who say they are Jews and are not, but lie—behold, I will make them come and bow down before your feet and know that I have loved you.
10 Because you have kept My word of perseverance, I also will keep you from the hour of trial that is coming upon the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth.
11 I am coming quickly. Hold fast what you have, so that no one may take your crown.
12 The one who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of My God, and he will never go out from it again. And I will write on him the name of My God and the name of the city of My God—the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from My God—and My new name.
13 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.

14 And to the angel of the church in Laodicea write:
These are the words of the Amen, the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God:
15 I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish that you were cold or hot.
16 So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I am about to spit you out of My mouth.
17 Because you say, “I am rich and have become wealthy and have need of nothing,” and you do not know that you are wretched and pitiable and poor and blind and naked,
18 I counsel you to buy from Me gold refined by fire so that you may be rich, and white garments so that you may clothe yourself and the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed, and salve to anoint your eyes so that you may see.
19 As many as I love, I rebuke and discipline. Be zealous, therefore, and repent.
20 Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears My voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and dine with him, and he with Me.
21 The one who overcomes, I will grant to sit with Me on My throne, just as I also overcame and sat with My Father on His throne.
22 He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches.


Chapter 4

1 After these things I looked, and behold, a door was standing open in heaven. And the first voice that I had heard speaking to me like a trumpet said, “Come up here, and I will show you what must take place after these things.”
2 Immediately I was in the Spirit, and behold, a throne was standing in heaven, and One was seated on the throne.
3 And the One seated was in appearance like jasper and carnelian, and a rainbow was around the throne, appearing like an emerald.

4 Around the throne were twenty-four thrones, and seated on the thrones were twenty-four elders, clothed in white garments, with golden crowns on their heads.
5 From the throne came flashes of lightning, rumblings, and peals of thunder. And before the throne were seven torches of fire burning, which are the seven spirits of God.
6 And before the throne was something like a sea of glass, like crystal.

In the midst of the throne and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes in front and behind.
7 The first living creature was like a lion, the second living creature was like an ox, the third living creature had a face like a man, and the fourth living creature was like an eagle in flight.
8 And the four living creatures, each of them having six wings, were full of eyes all around and within. And day and night they never cease to say:
“Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty,
who was, and is, and is to come.”

9 And whenever the living creatures give glory, and honor, and thanks to the One seated on the throne, who lives forever and ever,
10 the twenty-four elders fall down before the One seated on the throne, and worship Him who lives forever and ever. They cast their crowns before the throne, saying,
11 “Worthy are You, our Lord and God,
to receive glory and honor and power,
for You created all things,
and by Your will they existed and were created.”


Chapter 5

1 Then I saw in the right hand of the One seated on the throne a scroll written on the inside and on the back, sealed with seven seals.
2 And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and to break its seals?”
3 And no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it.
4 And I began to weep greatly, because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it.
5 But one of the elders said to me, “Do not weep. Behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome so that He can open the scroll and its seven seals.”

6 And I saw in the midst of the throne, and the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders - a Lamb standing, as though slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth.
7 And He came and took the scroll from the right hand of the One seated on the throne.
8 And when He had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each having a harp and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
9 And they sang a new song, saying,
“You are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals,
for You were slain, and by Your blood You ransomed men for God
from every tribe and tongue and people and nation,
10 and You made them a kingdom and priests to our God,
and they shall reign on the earth.”

11 Then I looked, and I heard the voice of many angels around the throne and the living creatures and the elders, and their number was myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands,
12 saying with a loud voice,
“Worthy is the Lamb who was slain
to receive power and riches and wisdom and strength
and honor and glory and blessing!”

13 And I heard every creature in heaven and on the earth and under the earth and on the sea, and all that is in them, saying,
“To Him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb
be blessing and honor and glory and dominion
forever and ever!”

14 And the four living creatures said, “Amen,” and the elders fell down and worshiped.


Chapter 6

1 Then I saw when the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures say with a voice like thunder, “Come!”
2 And I looked, and I saw a white horse, and the one sitting on it had a bow. And a crown was given to him, and he went out conquering and to continue to conquer.

3 And when He opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature say, “Come!”
4 And another horse, fiery red, went out. And it was granted to the one sitting on it to take peace from the earth, so that men would slay one another, and a great sword was given to him.

5 And when He opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature say, “Come!” And I looked, and I saw a black horse, and the one sitting on it had a balance scale in his hand.
6 And I heard something like a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, “A quart of wheat for a denarius, and three quarts of barley for a denarius—and do not harm the oil and the wine.”

7 And when He opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!”
8 And I looked, and I saw a pale green horse, and the one sitting on it was named Death, and the Grave followed after him. And authority was given to them over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword and with famine and with pestilence and by the wild beasts of the earth.

9 And when He opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God and for the testimony they had maintained.
10 And they cried out with a loud voice, saying, “How long, O Lord, holy and true, will You not judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?”
11 And a white robe was given to each of them, and they were told to rest a little while longer, until the number of their fellow servants and their brothers should be complete, those who were to be killed as they themselves had been.

12 And I looked when He opened the sixth seal, and behold, there was a great earthquake, and the sun became black like sackcloth made of hair, and the moon became like blood.
13 And the stars of heaven fell to the earth, as a fig tree casts its unripe figs when shaken by a strong wind.
14 And the sky vanished like a scroll being rolled up, and every mountain and island was removed from its place.
15 And the kings of the earth and the great men and the generals and the rich and the strong and every slave and free man hid themselves in the caves and among the rocks of the mountains.
16 And they said to the mountains and the rocks, “Fall on us and hide us from the face of the One seated on the throne and from the wrath of the Lamb,
17 for the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”


Chapter 7

1 After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of the earth so that no wind would blow on the earth or on the sea or against any tree.
2 And I saw another angel ascending from the rising of the sun, having the seal of the living God. And he called out with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea,
3 saying, “Do not harm the earth or the sea or the trees until we have sealed the servants of our God on their foreheads.”
4 And I heard the number of those who were sealed—144,000—sealed from every tribe of the sons of Israel:

5 from the tribe of Judah, 12,000 were sealed,
from the tribe of Reuben, 12,000,
from the tribe of Gad, 12,000,
6 from the tribe of Asher, 12,000,
from the tribe of Naphtali, 12,000,
from the tribe of Manasseh, 12,000,
7 from the tribe of Simeon, 12,000,
from the tribe of Levi, 12,000,
from the tribe of Issachar, 12,000,
8 from the tribe of Zebulun, 12,000,
from the tribe of Joseph, 12,000,
from the tribe of Benjamin, 12,000 were sealed.

9 After these things I looked, and I saw a great multitude that no one could count, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and with palm branches in their hands.
10 And they cried out with a loud voice, saying,
“Salvation belongs to our God
who sits on the throne,
and to the Lamb!”

11 And all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell on their faces before the throne and worshiped God,
12 saying,
“Amen!
Blessing and glory and wisdom
and thanksgiving and honor
and power and strength
be to our God forever and ever. Amen.”

13 Then one of the elders addressed me, saying, “Who are these, clothed in white robes, and where have they come from?”
14 And I said to him, “My lord, you know.” And he said to me, “These are the ones coming out of the great tribulation. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
15 Therefore they are before the throne of God,
and they serve Him day and night in His temple;
and He who sits on the throne
will shelter them with His presence.

16 They shall hunger no more,
neither shall they thirst anymore;
the sun shall not strike them,
nor any scorching heat.
17 For the Lamb in the midst of the throne will be their shepherd,
and He will guide them to springs of living water,
and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.”


Chapter 8

1 And when He opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
2 And I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
3 And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and much incense was given to him so that he might offer it with the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar before the throne.
4 And the smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, rose before God from the hand of the angel.
5 Then the angel took the censer and filled it with fire from the altar and threw it to the earth, and there were peals of thunder, rumblings, flashes of lightning, and an earthquake.

6 And the seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound them.
7 And the first sounded his trumpet, and there came hail and fire mixed with blood, and it was thrown upon the earth. And a third of the earth was burned up, and a third of the trees were burned up, and all green grass was burned up.

8 And the second angel sounded his trumpet, and something like a great mountain burning with fire was thrown into the sea, and a third of the sea became blood.
9 And a third of the living creatures in the sea died, and a third of the ships were destroyed.

10 And the third angel sounded his trumpet, and a great star fell from heaven, blazing like a torch, and it fell on a third of the rivers and on the springs of water.
11 The name of the star is called Wormwood. And a third of the waters became wormwood, and many men died from the waters, because they had been made bitter.

12 And the fourth angel sounded his trumpet, and a third of the sun was struck, and a third of the moon, and a third of the stars, so that a third of them was darkened and a third of the day did not shine, and likewise the night.
13 Then I looked, and I heard an eagle flying in the middle of the sky, saying with a loud voice, “Woe, woe, woe to those who dwell on the earth, because of the remaining trumpet blasts that the three angels are about to sound!”


Chapter 9

1 And the fifth angel sounded his trumpet, and I saw a star that had fallen from heaven to the earth, and the key to the pit of the abyss was given to him.
2 And he opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke went up from the pit like the smoke of a great furnace, and the sun and the air were darkened by the smoke from the pit.
3 Then out of the smoke came locusts upon the earth, and power was given to them, like the power the scorpions of the earth have.
4 And they were told not to harm the grass of the earth nor any green thing nor any tree, but only the men who did not have the seal of God on their foreheads.
5 And it was granted to them not to kill them but to torment them for five months, and their torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
6 And in those days men will seek death and will not find it; they will long to die, but death will flee from them.

7 Now the appearance of the locusts was like horses prepared for battle, and on their heads were what looked like crowns of gold, and their faces were like the faces of men.
8 And they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were like lions' teeth.
9 And they had breastplates like breastplates of iron, and the sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots with horses rushing into battle.
10 And they have tails like scorpions, and stingers, and in their tails is their power to hurt men for five months.
11 They have as king over them the angel of the abyss—his name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in Greek he has the name Apollyon.

12 The first woe has passed; behold, two woes are still coming after this.

13 Then the sixth angel sounded his trumpet, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar before God
14 saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.”
15 And the four angels who had been prepared for the hour and day and month and year were released to kill a third of mankind.
16 The number of the mounted troops was twice ten thousand times ten thousand—I heard the number of them.
17 And this is how I saw the horses in the vision and those who sat on them: they had breastplates the color of fire and of hyacinth and of sulfur, and the heads of the horses were like lions' heads, and out of their mouths came fire and smoke and sulfur.
18 A third of mankind was killed by these three plagues—by the fire and the smoke and the sulfur that came out of their mouths.
19 For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails, for their tails are like serpents, having heads, and with them they cause harm.

20 And the rest of mankind, who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, so as not to worship demons and the idols of gold and silver and bronze and stone and wood, which can neither see nor hear nor walk.
21 And they did not repent of their murders or their sorceries or their sexual immorality or their thefts.


Chapter 10

1 Then I saw another mighty angel coming down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was on his head, and his face was like the sun, and his legs like pillars of fire.
2 And he had in his hand a little scroll that was open. And he set his right foot on the sea and his left on the land,
3 and he cried out with a loud voice, like the roar of a lion. And when he cried out, the seven thunders spoke with their voices.
4 And when the seven thunders spoke, I was about to write, but I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Seal up what the seven thunders said, and do not write it down.”

5 And the angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to heaven
6 and swore by Him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, that there would be no more delay.
7 But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound his trumpet, then the mystery of God is completed, just as He announced to His servants the prophets.

8 And the voice that I heard from heaven was speaking with me again and said, “Go, take the scroll that is open in the hand of the angel who is standing on the sea and on the land.”
9 So I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little scroll. And he said to me, “Take and eat it; it will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be sweet as honey.”
10 And I took the little scroll from the angel’s hand and ate it, and it was sweet as honey in my mouth, but when I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
11 And they said to me, “You must prophesy again about many peoples and nations and tongues and kings.”


Chapter 11

1 Then a measuring rod like a staff was given to me, saying, “Rise and measure the temple of God and the altar and those who worship in it.
2 But exclude the court that is outside the temple; do not measure it, for it has been given to the nations, and they will trample the holy city for forty-two months.
3 And I will grant authority to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy for one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.”

4 These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands that stand before the Lord of the earth.
5 And if anyone wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and consumes their enemies; and if anyone wants to harm them, in this way he must be killed.
6 They have authority to shut the sky so that no rain falls during the days of their prophesying, and they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they desire.

7 And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up out of the abyss will make war against them and overcome them and kill them.
8 And their dead bodies will lie in the street of the great city, which symbolically is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
9 And those from the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations will gaze at their dead bodies for three and a half days, and they will not allow their dead bodies to be placed in a tomb.
10 And those who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them and make merry, and they will send gifts to one another, because these two prophets had tormented those who dwell on the earth.

11 But after the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered them, and they stood on their feet, and great fear fell on those who saw them.
12 And they heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here,” and they went up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies watched them.
13 And in that hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell, and seven thousand men were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven.

14 The second woe has passed; behold, the third woe is coming quickly.

15 Then the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, and there were loud voices in heaven, saying,
“The kingdom of the world has become
the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ,
and He will reign forever and ever.”

16 And the twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
17 saying,
“We give thanks to You, Lord God Almighty,
who is and who was,
because You have taken Your great power
and begun to reign.

18 And the nations were enraged,
but Your wrath came,
and the time for the dead to be judged,
and to reward Your servants the prophets
and the saints, and those who fear Your name,
both small and great,
and to destroy those who destroy the earth.”

19 Then the temple of God in heaven was opened, and the ark of His covenant appeared in His temple, and there were flashes of lightning and sounds and peals of thunder and an earthquake and a great hailstorm.


Chapter 12

1 And a great sign appeared in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
2 And she was pregnant and cried out in labor and in pain to give birth.

3 Then another sign appeared in heaven: behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven diadems.
4 And his tail swept away a third of the stars of heaven and cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
5 And she gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to shepherd all the nations with a rod of iron; and her child was caught up to God and to His throne.
6 And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, so that there they may nourish her for one thousand two hundred sixty days.

7 And war broke out in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon. And the dragon and his angels fought back,
8 but he was not strong enough, and there was no longer any place for them in heaven.
9 And the great dragon was thrown down—the ancient serpent, who is called the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole world—he was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
10 And I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying,
“Now the salvation and the power and the kingdom of our God
and the authority of His Christ have come,
for the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down,
he who accuses them before our God day and night.

11 And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb
and by the word of their testimony,
and they did not love their lives even unto death.
12 Therefore rejoice, O heavens and those who dwell in them!
But woe to the earth and the sea,
for the devil has come down to you in great wrath,
knowing that he has only a short time.”

13 And when the dragon saw that he had been thrown down to the earth, he pursued the woman who had given birth to the male child.
14 And the two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she could fly to the wilderness, to her place, where she is nourished for a time and times and half a time, away from the face of the serpent.
15 And the serpent poured water like a river out of his mouth after the woman, to sweep her away with a flood.
16 But the earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon had poured from his mouth.
17 And the dragon was enraged with the woman and went off to make war against the rest of her offspring—those who keep the commandments of God and have the testimony of Jesus.


Chapter 13

1 And I saw a beast rising out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads, and on its horns ten diadems, and on its heads names of blasphemy.
2 And the beast that I saw was like a leopard, and its feet were like those of a bear, and its mouth was like the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave it his power and his throne and great authority.
3 One of its heads appeared to be slain to death, but its deadly wound was healed. And the whole earth was amazed and followed after the beast.
4 And they worshiped the dragon because he had given authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast, and who is able to wage war against it?”

5 And a mouth was given to it speaking great things and blasphemies, and it was given authority to act for forty-two months.
6 And it opened its mouth in blasphemies against God, to blaspheme His name and His tabernacle—that is, those who dwell in heaven.
7 And it was granted to make war against the saints and to conquer them, and authority was given to it over every tribe and people and tongue and nation.
8 And all who dwell on the earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain.
9 If anyone has an ear, let him hear:
10 If anyone is for captivity, into captivity he goes;
if anyone is to be killed with the sword, with the sword he must be killed.
Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.

11 Then I saw another beast rising up from the earth, and it had two horns like a lamb, and it spoke like a dragon.
12 And it exercises all the authority of the first beast on its behalf, and it causes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose mortal wound was healed.
13 And it performs great signs, even making fire come down from heaven to the earth before men.
14 And it deceives those who dwell on the earth by the signs that it was given to perform on behalf of the beast, telling those who dwell on the earth to make an image for the beast who had the wound by the sword and yet lived.
15 And it was granted to give breath to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast might speak and cause whoever would not worship the image of the beast to be killed.

16 And it causes all—the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the free and the slave—to be given a mark on their right hand or on their forehead,
17 so that no one can buy or sell except the one who has the mark—the name of the beast or the number of its name.
18 Here is wisdom: let the one who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty-six.


Chapter 14

1 Then I looked, and behold, the Lamb was standing on Mount Zion, and with Him were one hundred forty-four thousand who had His name and the name of His Father written on their foreheads.
2 And I heard a voice from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of loud thunder, and the voice I heard was like that of harpists playing on their harps.
3 And they sang a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders, and no one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand who had been redeemed from the earth.

4 These are the ones who have not defiled themselves with women, for they are virgins. These are the ones who follow the Lamb wherever He goes. These have been redeemed from mankind as firstfruits to God and to the Lamb.
5 And in their mouth no lie was found—they are blameless.

6 And I saw another angel flying in midheaven, having an eternal gospel to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
7 and he said in a loud voice, “Fear God and give Him glory, because the hour of His judgment has come, and worship Him who made the heaven and the earth and sea and springs of water.”

8 And another, a second angel, followed, saying, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, she who has made all the nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality.”

9 And another angel, a third, followed them, saying in a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,
10 he also will drink the wine of the wrath of God, poured undiluted into the cup of His anger, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb.
11 And the smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever, and they have no rest, day or night—those who worship the beast and its image and whoever receives the mark of its name.”

12 Here is the endurance of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.
13 And I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write: Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.” “Yes,” says the Spirit, “so that they may rest from their labors, for their deeds follow after them.”

14 Then I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and seated on the cloud was one like a son of man, having a golden crown on His head and a sharp sickle in His hand.
15 And another angel came out of the temple, crying in a loud voice to the one seated on the cloud, “Put in Your sickle and reap, for the hour to reap has come, because the harvest of the earth is fully ripe.”
16 So the one seated on the cloud swung His sickle over the earth, and the earth was reaped.

17 And another angel came out of the temple that is in heaven, he also having a sharp sickle.
18 Then another angel came out from the altar, who had authority over fire, and he called out in a loud voice to the one who had the sharp sickle, saying, “Put in your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for its grapes are ripe.”
19 So the angel swung his sickle into the earth and gathered the vine of the earth and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
20 And the winepress was trodden outside the city, and blood flowed from the winepress as high as the horses’ bridles, for a distance of one thousand six hundred stadia.


Chapter 15

1 Then I saw another great and marvelous sign in heaven: seven angels having seven plagues—the last ones—for with them the wrath of God is completed.
2 And I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who had conquered the beast and its image and the number of its name were standing beside the sea of glass, having harps of God.
3 And they sing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying,
“Great and marvelous are Your works,
Lord God Almighty!
Righteous and true are Your ways,
King of the nations!

4 Who will not fear, O Lord,
and glorify Your name?
For You alone are holy.
All the nations will come and worship before You,
for Your righteous acts have been revealed.”

5 After these things I looked, and the temple of the tent of testimony in heaven was opened,
6 and the seven angels who had the seven plagues came out of the temple, clothed in pure, bright linen and wearing golden sashes around their chests.
7 Then one of the four living creatures gave the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God who lives forever and ever.
8 And the temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from His power, and no one could enter the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels were completed.


Chapter 16

1 Then I heard a loud voice from the temple saying to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God onto the earth.”
2 So the first went and poured out his bowl onto the earth, and harmful and painful sores broke out upon the men who had the mark of the beast and who worshiped its image.

3 The second poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood like that of a dead man, and every living creature in the sea died.

4 The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and the springs of water, and they became blood.
5 And I heard the angel of the waters saying,
“You are righteous, the One who is and who was,
O Holy One, because You judged these things;
6 for they poured out the blood of saints and prophets,
and You have given them blood to drink—
they are worthy of it.”
7 And I heard the altar saying,
“Yes, Lord God Almighty,
true and righteous are Your judgments.”

8 The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was allowed to scorch men with fire.
9 And men were scorched with intense heat, and they blasphemed the name of God who has authority over these plagues, and they did not repent to give Him glory.

10 The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and its kingdom was darkened, and they gnawed their tongues because of pain.
11 And they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores, and they did not repent of their deeds.

12 The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river, the Euphrates, and its water was dried up to prepare the way for the kings from the east.
13 And I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the beast and out of the mouth of the false prophet three unclean spirits like frogs.
14 For they are spirits of demons performing signs, who go out to the kings of the whole world to gather them for battle on the great day of God Almighty.
15 “Behold, I am coming like a thief. Blessed is the one who stays awake and keeps his garments, so that he will not go about naked and they will not see his shame.”
16 And they gathered them at the place that in Hebrew is called Armageddon.

17 The seventh poured out his bowl into the air, and a loud voice came from the temple, from the throne, saying, “It is done.”
18 And there were flashes of lightning and sounds and peals of thunder, and there was a great earthquake—an earthquake so great, that such has not occurred since man was on the earth.
19 And the great city was split into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. And Babylon the great was remembered before God, to give her the cup of the wine of the wrath of His fury.
20 And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.
21 And great hailstones, about a talent in weight, came down from heaven upon men; and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for the plague is extremely severe.


Chapter 17

1 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, “Come, I will show you the judgment of the great harlot who sits on many waters,
2 with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and those who dwell on the earth became drunk with the wine of her immorality.”

3 And he carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness, and I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet beast that was full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns.
4 And the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of her sexual immorality.
5 And on her forehead was written a name, a mystery:
“Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and of the abominations of the earth.”
6 And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And when I saw her, I was greatly astonished.

7 And the angel said to me, “Why are you astonished? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
8 The beast that you saw was, and is not, and is about to rise out of the abyss and go to destruction. And those who dwell on the earth, whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, will marvel when they see the beast, because it was and is not and will come.
9 Here is the mind that has wisdom: The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits,
10 and they are seven kings; five have fallen, one is, the other has not yet come, and when he comes, he must remain a little while.
11 And the beast that was and is not—he himself is an eighth and is of the seven, and he goes to destruction.

12 And the ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they receive authority as kings for one hour with the beast.
13 These are of one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
14 These will make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb will conquer them, because He is Lord of lords and King of kings—and those with Him are called and chosen and faithful.”

15 And he said to me, “The waters that you saw, where the harlot sits, are peoples and multitudes and nations and tongues.
16 And the ten horns that you saw, and the beast—these will hate the harlot and will make her desolate and naked, and will eat her flesh and burn her with fire.
17 For God has put it into their hearts to carry out His purpose by being of one mind and giving their kingdom to the beast until the words of God are fulfilled.
18 And the woman whom you saw is the great city, which has dominion over the kings of the earth.”


Chapter 18

1 After these things I saw another angel coming down from heaven, having great authority, and the earth was illuminated with his glory.
2 And he cried out with a mighty voice, saying,
“Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great!
She has become a dwelling place of demons,
a haunt for every unclean spirit,
a haunt for every unclean bird,
a haunt for every unclean and detestable beast.

3 For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her immorality, and the kings of the earth have committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth have grown rich from the power of her luxurious living.”

4 Then I heard another voice from heaven, saying,
“Come out from her, my people,
so that you do not participate in her sins,
and so that you do not receive her plagues;
5 for her sins have reached up to heaven,
and God has remembered her iniquities.

6 Pay her back as she also paid back,
and double for her double according to her deeds;
in the cup that she mixed, mix double for her.
7 As much as she glorified herself and lived in luxury,
give her that much torment and mourning,
because she says in her heart,
‘I sit as a queen and am no widow,
and I will never see mourning.’

8 For this reason her plagues will come in a single day—death and mourning and famine—and she will be burned up with fire, for mighty is the Lord God who judges her.”

9 And the kings of the earth, who committed sexual immorality and lived in luxury with her, will weep and wail over her when they see the smoke of her burning.
10 They will stand far off, in fear of her torment, saying,
“Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon the strong city!
For in a single hour your judgment has come.”

11 And the merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, because no one buys their cargo any longer—
12 cargo of gold and silver and precious stones and pearls,
fine linen and purple and silk and scarlet,
all kinds of citron wood, all kinds of ivory articles,
all kinds of articles of costly wood and bronze and iron and marble,
13 cinnamon and spice and incense, myrrh and frankincense,
wine and olive oil, fine flour and wheat,
cattle and sheep, horses and chariots,
and slaves—that is, human souls.

14 And the fruit your soul desired has departed from you,
and all your luxurious and splendid things are lost to you;
they will never be found again.

15 The merchants of these things, who grew rich from her, will stand far off in fear of her torment, weeping and mourning,
16 saying,
“Woe, woe, the great city,
clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet,
adorned with gold and precious stones and pearls!
17 For in a single hour such great wealth has been laid waste.”

And every shipmaster and everyone who sails to a place, and sailors and as many as make their living by the sea, stood far off
18 and were crying out as they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, “What city is like the great city?”
19 And they threw dust on their heads and cried out, weeping and mourning, saying,
“Woe, woe, the great city,
by which all who had ships at sea became rich from her wealth,
for in a single hour she has been laid waste.”

20 Rejoice over her, O heaven,
and you saints and apostles and prophets,
because God has pronounced judgment for you against her.

21 Then one mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and threw it into the sea, saying,
“So will Babylon the great city be thrown down with violence,
and it will never be found again.

22 And the sound of harpists and musicians,
flute players and trumpeters
will never be heard in you again,
and no craftsman of any craft
will ever be found in you again,
and the sound of the mill
will never be heard in you again.

23 And the light of a lamp
will never shine in you again,
and the voice of bridegroom and bride
will never be heard in you again;
for your merchants were the great ones of the earth,
and by your sorcery all the nations were deceived.
24 And in her was found the blood of prophets and of saints,
and of all who have been slain on the earth.”


Chapter 19

1 After these things I heard something like the loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying,
“Hallelujah!
Salvation and glory and power belong to our God,
2 because His judgments are true and just;
for He has judged the great harlot who corrupted the earth with her immorality,
and He has avenged the blood of His servants from her hand.”

3 And a second time they said,
“Hallelujah!
Her smoke goes up forever and ever.”
4 And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying,
“Amen. Hallelujah!”
5 And a voice came from the throne, saying,
“Praise our God, all you His servants,
and you who fear Him, small and great.”

6 And I heard something like the voice of a great multitude and like the sound of many waters and like the sound of mighty peals of thunder, saying,
“Hallelujah!
For the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns.
7 Let us rejoice and be glad and give Him the glory,
because the marriage of the Lamb has come,
and His bride has made herself ready.”
8 And it was given to her to clothe herself in fine linen, bright and pure;
for the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the saints.

9 And he said to me, “Write: Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb.” And he said to me, “These are the true words of God.”
10 Then I fell at his feet to worship him, but he said to me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers who hold to the testimony of Jesus. Worship God! For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.”

11 Then I saw heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and He who sits on it is called Faithful and True, and in righteousness He judges and wages war.
12 His eyes are a flame of fire, and on His head are many diadems; and He has a name written which no one knows except Himself.
13 And He is clothed in a garment dipped in blood, and His name is called The Word of God.
14 And the armies which are in heaven, clothed in fine linen, white and clean, were following Him on white horses.
15 And from His mouth comes a sharp sword, so that with it He may strike down the nations, and He will rule them with a rod of iron; and He treads the winepress of the fury of the wrath of God the Almighty.
16 And on His garment and on His thigh He has a name written: “King of kings and Lord of lords.”

17 Then I saw one angel standing in the sun, and he cried out with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in midheaven, “Come, gather for the great supper of God,
18 so that you may eat the flesh of kings and the flesh of military commanders and the flesh of the mighty and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them and the flesh of all men, both free and slave, small and great.”

19 And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies assembled to make war against Him who sits on the horse and against His army.
20 And the beast was seized, and with it the false prophet who performed the signs in its presence by which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped its image; these two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
21 And the rest were killed with the sword that came from the mouth of Him who sits on the horse, and all the birds gorged themselves on their flesh.


Chapter 20

1 Then I saw an angel coming down from heaven, holding in his hand the key of the abyss and a great chain.
2 And he seized the dragon, that ancient serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him for a thousand years,
3 and threw him into the abyss and shut it and sealed it over him, so that he might not deceive the nations any longer, until the thousand years were finished. After these things he must be released for a short time.

4 Then I saw thrones, and seated on them were those to whom authority to judge was given. And I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded because of the testimony of Jesus and because of the word of God, and who had not worshiped the beast or his image and had not received the mark on their foreheads and on their hands. And they came to life and reigned with Christ for a thousand years.
5 The rest of the dead did not come to life until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.
6 Blessed and holy is the one who has a share in the first resurrection. Over these the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ and will reign with Him for a thousand years.

7 And when the thousand years are finished, Satan will be released from his prison
8 and will come out to deceive the nations that are at the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them for battle. Their number is like the sand of the sea.
9 And they went up over the broad plain of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city, but fire came down from heaven and consumed them.
10 And the devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet also are, and they will be tormented day and night forever and ever.

11 Then I saw a great white throne and Him who sat on it, from whose presence earth and heaven fled, and no place was found for them.
12 And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened. Then another book was opened, which is the book of life. And the dead were judged from what was written in the books, according to their deeds.
13 And the sea gave up the dead that were in it, and death and the grave gave up the dead that were in them, and they were judged, each one according to his deeds.
14 Then death and the grave were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death—the lake of fire.
15 And if anyone’s name was not found written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.


Chapter 21

1 Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more.
2 And I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
3 And I heard a loud voice from the throne, saying,
“Behold, the dwelling of God is with man,
and He will dwell with them,
and they will be His people,
and God Himself will be with them as their God.
4 And He will wipe away every tear from their eyes,
and death shall be no more,
nor shall there be mourning or crying or pain anymore,
for the former things have passed away.”

5 And the One seated on the throne said, “Behold, I am making all things new.” He also said, “Write, for these words are trustworthy and true.”
6 And He said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the one who thirsts I will give from the spring of the water of life without cost.
7 The one who conquers will inherit these things, and I will be his God, and he will be My son.
8 But as for the cowardly and unbelieving and detestable, and murderers and the sexually immoral and sorcerers and idolaters and all liars—their portion will be in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.”

9 Then one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven final plagues came and spoke with me, saying, “Come, I will show you the bride, the wife of the Lamb.”
10 And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great, high mountain, and showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God,
11 having the glory of God—its radiance like a most rare jewel, like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.
12 It had a great, high wall, with twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel.
13 On the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the west three gates.
14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

15 And the one who spoke with me had a gold measuring rod to measure the city and its gates and its wall.
16 And the city lies foursquare; its length is the same as its width. And he measured the city with the rod: twelve thousand stadia; its length and width and height are equal.
17 He also measured its wall: 144 cubits by human measurement, which is also an angel’s.
18 The wall was built of jasper, and the city was pure gold, like clear glass.
19 The foundations of the wall of the city were adorned with every kind of precious stone: the first was jasper, the second sapphire, the third agate, the fourth emerald,
20 the fifth onyx, the sixth carnelian, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, the twelfth amethyst.
21 And the twelve gates were twelve pearls—each of the gates made of a single pearl—and the street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.

22 And I saw no temple in the city, for its temple is the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb.
23 And the city has no need of the sun or of the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God gives it light, and its lamp is the Lamb.
24 By its light the nations will walk, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it.
25 And its gates will never be shut by day—and there will be no night there.
26 They will bring into it the glory and the honor of the nations.
27 But nothing unclean will ever enter it, nor anyone who does what is detestable or false, but only those who are written in the Lamb’s book of life.


Chapter 22

1 Then he showed me a river of the water of life, bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb
2 through the middle of the street of the city. On either side of the river was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. And the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations.
3 There will no longer be any curse, and the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city, and His servants will serve Him.
4 They will see His face, and His name will be on their foreheads.
5 And there will be no night there, and they will have no need of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will give them light, and they will reign forever and ever.

6 And he said to me, “These words are faithful and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent His angel to show His servants what must soon take place.”
7 “Behold, I am coming quickly. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”

8 I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed them to me.
9 But he said to me, “Do not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and with your brothers the prophets and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!”

10 And he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near.
11 Let the one who is unrighteous still do unrighteousness, and let the filthy still be filthy, and let the righteous still do righteousness, and let the holy still be holy.”

12 “Behold, I am coming quickly, and My reward is with Me, to give to each one as his work deserves.
13 I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.”

14 Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and may enter the city by the gates.
15 Outside are the dogs and the sorcerers and the sexually immoral and the murderers and the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.

16 “I, Jesus, have sent My angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star.”

17 The Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” And let the one who hears say, “Come!” And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who desires take the water of life freely.

18 I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues that are written in this book,
19 and if anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his share from the tree of life and from the holy city, which are written in this book.

20 He who testifies to these things says, “Yes, I am coming quickly.”
Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!

21 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with all.

